---
rule: §2
---

The @[Devanāgarī] alphabet consists of forty-eight letters or @[varṇa]s, nine vowels or @[svara]s, and thirty-three consonants or @[vyañjana]s.*

(a) These express nearly every gradation of sound, and every letter stands for a particular and invariable sound.

Note:—This explains why there are no names, as in Greek, for the different letters of the alphabet.

* Thus given by @[Pāṇini]:—

Vowels:—@[a i u ṛ] | @[ṛ ḷ k] | @[e o ṅ] | @[ai au c] |

Consonants:—@[ha ya va ra ṭ] | @[la ṇ] | @[ña ma ṅa ṇa na m] | @[jha bha ñ] | @[gha ḍha dha ṣ] | @[ja ba ga ḍa da ś] | @[kha pha cha ṭha tha ca ṭa ta v] | @[ka pa y] | @[śa ṣa sa r] | @[ha l] |

The alphabet, it will be seen, is divided into 14 sections by @[Pāṇini], which are called @[sūtra]s or the @[sūtra]s revealed by Śiva. Each section ends with an indicatory letter called '@[it]', which is not to be counted among the letters of the alphabet. These "@[it]s" serve an important purpose in Sanskrit grammar as they enable the grammarians to express several letters, or groups of letters, in a very convenient and condensed form. For any letter, with the following @[it] added to it, is not only expressive of itself but of all letters that intervene between it and this @[it]; e.g.—@[aṇ] means @[a], @[i], @[u]; @[ik] means @[i], @[u], @[ṛ], @[ḷ], &c. Similarly @[al] means technically the whole alphabet, @[ac] any vowel, and @[hal] any consonant; @[yaṇ] a semivowel, @[jaś] a soft consonant, @[khar] a hard consonant, @[jaṣ] a soft unaspirate, @[jhaṣ] a soft aspirate &c. Each of these significant terms is technically called a '@[pratyāhāra]'.

Since short vowels include the long and the protracted vowels (See § 3, a.) another @[it] '@[ṅ]' is generally employed to mark a

* @deva[अ], @deva[इ], @deva[उ], @deva[ऋ] and @deva[लृ], and four diphthongs viz. @deva[ए], @deva[ऐ], @deva[ओ] and @deva[औ].

(b) A vowel may be @deva[ह्रस्व] or short, @deva[दीर्घ] or long, @deva[प्लुत] or protracted (also called prolated by some) according to the time required to pronounce it. The vowels are thus divided:

(1) Short vowels—@deva[अ] a, @deva[इ] i, @deva[उ] u, @deva[ऋ] ṛ, @deva[लृ] lṛ;

(2) Long vowels—@deva[आ] ā, @deva[ई] ī, @deva[ऊ] ū, @deva[ॠ] ṝ, @deva[ए] e, @deva[ऐ] ai, @deva[ओ] o, @deva[औ] au; and

(3) Protracted vowels @deva[अ ३] a 3, @deva[इ ३] i 3, @deva[उ ३] u 3, @deva[ऋ ३] ṛ 3, @deva[लृ ३] lṛ 3, @deva[आ ३] ā 3, @deva[ई ३] ī 3, @deva[ऊ ३] ū 3, @deva[ॠ ३] ṝ 3, @deva[ए ३] e 3, @deva[ऐ ३] ai 3, @deva[ओ ३] o 3, and @deva[औ ३] au 3.

N. B.—As the @[Pluta] or protracted vowels are not commonly to be met with in classical Sanskrit, the vowels are usually given as thirteen, represented by the thirteen signs given above under (1) and (2).

(c) Each of these vowels may be again of two kinds, @deva[अनुनासिक] or nasalised, and @deva[अननुनासिक] or without a nasal sound.†

(d) Vowels are also further discriminated into @deva[उदात्त] or acute, @deva[अनुदात्त] or grave, and @deva[स्वरित] or circumflex. @deva[उदात्त] is that which proceeds from the upper part of the vocal organs, @deva[अनुदात्त] that which proceeds from their lower part, while @deva[स्वरित] arises out of a mixture of these two.* But these are ignored in classical Sanskrit. They are marked only in Vedic works: the Udātta is left unmarked; the Anudātta is marked with a horizontal line underneath; and Svarita has a perpendicular stroke above it. e. g. @deva[क्व नु वोऽश्वाः] &c. Ṛg. X. 61. 2 @deva[वय॑शः] &c. Ṛg. I. 78. 4. @deva[शतचक्रं यो॑ऽश्विनः] &c. Ṛg. X. 161. 4.

Thus there are eighteen different modifications of each of the vowels @deva[अ], @deva[इ], @deva[उ], @deva[ऋ], and twelve of @deva[ए], @deva[ऐ], @deva[ओ] and @deva[औ]; for there is no long @deva[लृ] and the last four have not their corresponding short vowels.