---
rule: §20
---

When @[a] or @[ā] is followed by @[i], @[ī], @[u], @[ū], short or long, the @[guṇa] letter corresponding to the latter takes the place of both; e.g. @[upa] + @[indraḥ] = @[upendraḥ] Viṣṇu; @[parama] + @[īśvaraḥ] = @[parameśvaraḥ] the great lord; @[ramā] + @[icchā] = @[ramecchā] the wish of Rāmā; @[yathā] + @[iṣṭitam] = @[yatheṣṭitam] according to wish or desire; @[hita] + @[upadeśaḥ] = @[hitopadeśaḥ] friendly instruction; @[kṛṣṇa] + @[ūruḥ] = @[kṛṣṇoruḥ] Kṛṣṇa's thigh; @[gaṅgā] + @[udakam] = @[gaṅgodakam]; @[mahā] + @[ūruḥ] = @[mahoruḥ]; @[kṛṣṇa] + @[ṛddhiḥ] = @[kṛṣṇardhiḥ] Kṛṣṇa's prosperity; @[tava] + @[ṛkāraḥ] = @[tavarkāraḥ] the @[ṛkāra] pronounced by you.

(a) If a consonant be followed by homogeneous consonants, except the nasals, the semivowels, and @[h], the first of them is optionally dropped; @[vana] + @[ṛddhiḥ] = @[vanardhiḥ] by the general rule; e.g. @[kṛṣṇa] + @[r] + @[dh] + @[iḥ] = @[kṛṣṇardhiḥ] by this rule, the @[ṛ] being dropped; and also a third form @[kṛṣṇaṛddhiḥ] (vide § 22, sec. d. e. below).

(b) A consonant of the first five classes except @[ñ] coming after a semivowel is optionally doubled; so @[tavarkāraḥ] also becomes @[tavarkkāraḥ], @[tavarkāraḥ] and @[tavarkkāraḥ], 4 forms altogether.

**Exceptions:—Vṛddhi** substitute takes place in the following cases:

(a) When a word ending in @[ā] is followed by @[ū], and @[ū] by @[ūha], @[ūhana] and @[ūhya]; e.g. @[pra] + @[ūhaḥ] = @[prauhaḥ], chief guess (or this may be the acc. pl. of @[prauga] a young bull trained to the yoke); @[pra] + @[ūhaḥ] = @[prauhaḥ] principal reasoning. Similarly @[prauḍhaḥ] full grown; @[prauḍhā]; but @[upohana] (as @[ūha] + @[ana] is not mentioned in the Sūtra).

(b) @[akṣa] + @[ūhinī] = @[akṣauhiṇī] a complete army. (The change of @[au] to @[auh] will be explained further on).

(c) When @[sva] is followed by @[īra] and @[īrin] both derived from @[ir] to go; e.g. @[sva] + @[īraḥ] = @[svairaḥ], one acting wilfully, self-willed; @[sva] + @[īriṇī] = @[svairiṇī]; so @[svaira], @[svairin] (@[svena īryate iti]).

(d) When @[a] is followed by @[ṛta] and there is an inst. sense; e.g. @[sukha] + @[kṛta] = @[sukhakṛta] blessed with happiness (@[sukhena kṛtaḥ]), but @[parameśvaraḥ] very adorable (@[parama īśvaraḥ] @[atra]).

(e) When the word @[ṛṇa] comes after; e.g. @[pra] + @[ṛṇa] = @[prārṇam], principal debt, so @[vatsatarārṇam] debt for a calf, @[śodhārṇam] (a debt contracted to liquidate a previous debt or @[pūrva ṛṇaḥ]). @[Daśārṇaḥ] (Name of a country; lit. the country with ten fortresses), also @[daśārṇā nadī] (lit. the river into which ten other rivers flow).

(f) When a preposition ending in @[a] is followed by a root having an initial @[ṛ]; e.g. @[pra] + @[ṛṣyati] = @[prārṣyati]; but if the root be a denominative, the Vṛddhi is optional; @[vṛṣaḥ], @[vṛṣāyati] = @[pra vṛṣāyati] or @[prā vārṣāyati] acts like a bull; but @[upa] + @[ṛkārīyati] = @[uparkārīyati], as the @[a] is long; also @[pra-ḷkṣārīyati] = @[prā-prālkṣārīyati] very much wishes for @[ḷkāra]; for @[ḷ] is grammatically considered to be similar to @[ṛ].

**§ 21.** When @[a] or @[ā] is followed by @[e] or @[ai] and @[o] or @[au] @[e] and @[o] are respectively substituted for both; e.g. @[ca] + @[eva] = @[caiva]; @[deva] + @[aiśvaryam] = @[devaiśvaryam] the majesty of god; @[sā] + @[eva] = @[saiva] she alone, @[bhava] + @[oṣadham] = @[bhavoṣadham] medicine @[bhava utpatti] birth and rebirth; @[divā] + @[autsukyam] = @[divautsukyam] longing for knowledge.

**Exceptions:—**

(a) If a preposition ending in @[a] be followed by a root beginning with @[e] or @[o], @[ai] or @[au] is substituted; @[pra] + @[ejate] = @[praijate] quakes very much; @[upa] + @[oṣati] = @[upauṣati] burns something near; but if the root be a denominative, vṛddhi is optional; @[upa] + @[eḍakīyati] = @[upaiḍakīyati] or @[upeḍakīyati]; @[pra] + @[odhīyati] = @[praudhīyati] or @[prodhīyati].

@[upasargāt ca] Pāṇ. VI. 1. 91. @[vā dhātoḥ yak ādikhalitaḥ] | Pāṇ. VI. 1. 92. † @[vṛddhir eci] Pāṇ. VI. 1. 88. ‡ @[eṅi paravṛttam] | Pāṇ. VI. 1. 94.

**Counter-exception:—**If a form of the root @[i] to go, or @[ay] to grow, with an initial @[e], comes after @[a], and @[eṣ] or @[yeṣ] derived from @[iṣ] of the 4th, 6th or 9th conj., after @[pra], @[guṇa] takes place; @[upa] + @[eti] = @[upeti]; @[upa] + @[eṣate] = @[upeṣate]; (but @[upa] + @[etaḥ] = @[upetaḥ] @[jānāti] know; from @[ava] + @[ehi] which is equal to @[ava] + @[ā] + @[ihi], and not @[avehi]; @[na pravān pra] + @[idhidhvat] = @[predidhvat]); @[para] + @[eṣaḥ] = @[pareṣaḥ] sending or directing; @[pra] + @[eṣyaḥ] = @[preṣyaḥ] a servant. But @[praiṣaḥ], @[praiṣyaḥ] (from @[iṣ])

(b) When @[a] is followed by @[eva] in an @[anirdiṣṭa] sense, @[ai] is substituted for both, @[kva] + @[eva] = @[kvaiva bhokṣyase] where will you dine to-day? (The place being not definitely known), but @[atra eva] (why, I shall dine at your house).

(c) @[a] followed by @[om] and @[ā] (prep.) is dropped, e.g., @[śiva] + @[ām] = @[namo śivāyo namaḥ]; @[ji] + @[ehi] (@[ā] + @[ihi]) = @[jehi].

(d) The vṛddhi is optional when the ending @[a] of a word is followed by @[oṭu] a cat, or @[oṣṭha] the lower lip, in a compound @[sthūla] + @[oṭu] = @[sthūlauṭuḥ] or @[sthūloṭuḥ] @[jighāmsoṣṭhaḥ] @[bimboṣṭhaḥ].

(e) The final vowel or the final consonant with the preceding vowel is dropped in the case of the following words; when followed by certain words in a compound:—@[śaka] the country of the @[Śaka]s + @[andhu] a city = @[śakandhuḥ], @[kāka] name of a country + @[andhuḥ] = @[kākandhuḥ]; @[gṛha] home + @[ṭā] one who moves from one mansion to another, a woman of bad character; @[sīman] + @[antaḥ] = @[sīmāntaḥ] (the white line left by the parting of the hair on each side of the head); but @[sīmāntaḥ] when the meaning of the word is 'the last line or limit of a boundary.' @[manas] + @[īṣā] = @[manīṣā] wish; so @[halīṣā] or @[halīṣā] the pole of a plough; @[halīṣā]; @[patan] + @[jaliḥ] = @[patañjaliḥ] etc. of the celebrated author of the @[Mahābhāṣya] (a vast commentary on the @[sūtras] of @[Pāṇini]); lit. fit to be adored with joined hands; or according to tradition 'who fell down from the hands of a certain sage as he was offering water to the sun at the time of @[sandhyā] adoration.' @[sāra] + @[aṅgaḥ] = @[sāraṅgaḥ] an antelope with a spotted skin or a kind of bird; but @[sarāṅgaḥ] one with a beautiful skin. This is an @[Āditigaṇa] i.e. words of similar formation and requiring grammatical explanation but not actually found in the @[gaṇa] may be classed under it; e.g. @[māta] + @[aṇḍaḥ] = @[mārtāṇḍaḥ] (derived from @[māraṇḍa]) lit. born of a dead egg, the sun.

@[eva ca anirdiṣṭe] Vārttik. † @[omāṅoś ca] Pāṇ. VI. 1. 95.
‡ @[otuvoṣṭhayoḥ samāse ca]' § @[śakandhvādiṣu ca vācyam].

And also in the case of an onomatopoetic word ending in @[t] followed by @[iti] e.g. @[paṭat] + @[iti] = @[paṭiti]; but not in the case of a monosyllabic word @[bhat] + @[iti] = @[bhatiti]; and when the word is repeated, only the @[t] is optionally dropped, as @[paṭat paṭat] + @[iti] = @[paṭat paṭitīti] or @[paṭat paṭatiti].

**§ 22.** When @[i], @[u], @[ṛ] and @[ḷ], short or long, are followed by a dissimilar vowel, @[y], @[v], @[r] and @[l] are respectively substituted for them*; e.g. @[iti] + @[āha] = @[ityāha]; @[dhī] + @[upāsyaḥ] = @[dhyupāsyaḥ] adored by the wise, @[madhu] + @[ariḥ] = @[madhvariḥ] the enemy of @[madhu], i.e. @[Viṣṇu], @[dhātṛ] + @[aṃśaḥ] = @[dhātrāṃśaḥ] a portion of the creator; @[lū] + @[ākṛtiḥ] = @[lvākṛtiḥ] a figure like that of @[lū] etc.

**N.B.**—Several of the above words may have more than one form when combined; e.g. @[dhī] + @[upāsyaḥ] = @[dhī] + @[upāsyaḥ] by the general rule:—

**N.B.** The following rules and the two (a), (b) given under § 20, though they properly form the subject of the next section, are given here to avoid confusion. Ordinary students may pass over these except sec. (d) of the present art.

(a) A consonant except @[y], preceded by a vowel, is optionally doubled, if no vowel follows*; @[dhī] + @[upāsyaḥ] = @[dhiyyupāsyaḥ] and @[dhyupāsyaḥ].

(b) When a consonant, except a nasal or a semivowel, is followed by a soft unaspirate or aspirate (3rd or 4th letter of a class) it is changed to the soft unaspirate (3rd letter) of its class†; @[dhī] + @[upāsyaḥ] = @[dhiyupāsyaḥ].

(c) Semivowels, when preceded by a letter of the first five classes except @[y],