---
rule: §116
---

Participial bases ending in @[at]:—

(a) The declension of these does not differ from that of nouns in @[mat] except in the Nom. sing. mas. in which the @[a] of @[at] is not lengthened. In the case of the dual of the Nom. Voc. and the Acc. neu. @[nu] is inserted before the final @[t] necessarily in the case of the present participles of the roots of the 1st, 4th, and 10th classes, and of causal, desiderative and nominal verbs, optionally in the case of those of the 6th class, of roots ending in @[a] of the 2nd class, and of those of the Fut. in @[syat] or @[iṣyat], and not at all in the case of the remaining participles of the present tense.

@[bhavat] being. @[adat] eating.

mas. mas.

N.V. @[bhavan] @[bhavantau] @[bhavantaḥ] N.V. @[adan] @[adantau] @[adantaḥ]
A. @[bhavantam] @[bhavantau] @[bhavataḥ] A. @[adantam] @[adantau] @[adataḥ]

The rest like @[dhīmat]. The rest like @[dhīmat].

Decline all other participles of the Present and Fut. Par. in the mas. similarly.

N.V. A. Neu.

@[bhavat—bhavat] @[bhavatī—ntī] @[bhavanti]
@[adat—adat] @[adatī—ntī] @[adanti]
@[yāt—yāt] @[yātī—ntī] @[yānti] The rest like
@[dāsyat—dāsyat] @[dāsyatī—ntī] @[dāsyanti] the mas.
@[ṛdat—ṛdat] @[ṛdatī—ntī] @[ṛdanti]

Decline @[pat], @[tudat], @[corayat], @[cikīrṣat], @[bodhiṣat], @[bubhīyat] &c., like @[bhavat]; @[kariṣyat] &c. like @[tudat]; @[khādat], @[adat], @[rundhat], @[krīṇat], &c., like @[adat].

N. B. The fem. of these ends in @[ī] being the same as Nom. dual of the Neu. and has no declensional peculiarities.

Decline @[bṛhat] m. & a. great, @[pṛṣat] m. & a. deer; n. a drop of water and @[jagat] the world, like @[adat] mas. & neu.

(b) @[nu] is not inserted at all in the case of the participle of the Pres. of roots of the third class and of the Parasmai. Intentative and the participles @[śāsat], @[jakṣat], @[cakṣāsat], @[takṣat], @[jāgrat], @[dīvyat] and @[vekṣyat]; in the case of the Nom. Voc. and Acc. plu. neu., however, it is optionally inserted:—

mas.

@[dadat] giving. @[jāgrat] awaking.

N. V. @[dadat] @[dadatau] @[dadataḥ] @[jāgrat] @[jāgratau] @[jāgrataḥ]
A. @[dadatam] @[dadatau] @[dadataḥ] @[jāgratam] @[jāgratau] @[jāgrataḥ]

&c. &c.

neu.

N.V.A. @[dadat] @[dadatau] @[dadanti]

The rest like @[mat].

Nouns ending in @[an] and @[man].