---
rule: §186
---

A @[dvandva] compound consists of two or more nouns which, if not compounded, would be connected by the copulative particle @[ca] (and), as @[rāmakṛṣṇau] which is equal to @[rāmaḥ ca kṛṣṇaḥ ca]; @[pāṇipādam] which is the same as @[pāṇī ca pādau ca]. There are three species of the @[dvandva], viz. @[itaretaradvandva], @[samāhāra] and @[ekaśeṣa].†

* This is true only generally speaking. For there is a fifth class of compounds, viz. @[avyaya]-compounds not governed by any of the rules given under the four classes but explained on the general principle that any @[subanta] @[pada] may be compounded with any other @[subanta] @[pada]. According to some there are six kinds of compounds, viz. @[subanta subantena subanta nāmnā dhātu nāmnā tiṅantena tiṅantena | avyayantena iti vijñeyaḥ samāsaḥ ṣaḍvidho bhavet ||] e.g. @[subanta subantena rājapuruṣaḥ | subanta nāmnā | nāmnā kumbhakāraḥ | dhātunā kaṭabhūḥ, ajanma | tiṅantena pibanmadantā, svādanmedantā | tiṅantena avyayantena yasyāṃ kriyāyāṃ sā ekāntavicakṣaṇaḥ | ehīti ādayo 'nyaṣaḍārtha iti madhyamasakādo vyāpāt samāsaḥ |] Sid. K.

† @[ca-arthe dvandvaḥ] Pāṇ. II. 2. 29.

‡ The @[ekaśeṣa] is not strictly speaking a subdivision of @[dvandva]. It is a separate @[vṛtti] by itself (Vide § 179). Sanskrit grammarians do not regard it as a @[dvandva], though it may be so regarded for the sake of convenience. 'It is not a @[dvandva],' remarks Bhaṭṭoji Dīkṣita, 'as it does not contain more than one @[subanta] (@[anekasubantāśrayād dvandvaḥ]).' It should be further remembered that since it is not a @[samāsa], its final vowel does not become @[udātta], as in the case of a @[dvandva] compound.