---
rule: §197
---

When several words of the same form (or dissimilar in form but of the same import) are compounded together, only one of them is retained with the necessary number.

- @[dyaścudaṣahāntāssamāhāre] | Pāṇ. V. 4. 106.

† @[divo dyāvā] | @[divasaś ca pṛthivyāḥ] | Vār. VI. 3. 29, 30.

‡ @[dampatī] is considered by some to be a word of regular formation. @[dam] in the Vedic literature means 'a house' and @[pati] 'a master'. Hence the full word @[dampatī] would mean 'the mistress of the house.'

^ A final @[a] is added in the case of these compounds according to a Sūtra of Pāṇ. (@[acaturaḥ] V. 4. 77.) quoted further on under § 284.

× @[virūpāṇāmapi samānārthānām] | Vār. V. 4. 78. @[vakradaṇḍaś ca kuṭiladaṇḍaś ca vakradaṇḍau] or @[kuṭiladaṇḍau] |

e.g. @[rāmaś ca rāmaḥ rāmau], @[rāmaś ca rāmaś ca rāmaś ca rāmāḥ]. This is called @[ekādhyuktaḥ]. In the case of the masc. and fem. genders the one of the masc. gender is retained;* as @[haṃsī ca haṃsaś ca haṃsau]; similarly @[goṇau], @[śyenau], @[ajau], &c.

(a) This principle is further extended to some words dissimilar in form, as in the following examples:— @[svasā ca svasāraś ca svasārau], @[duhitā ca svasā ca svasārau]; @[mātā ca pitā ca pitarau] (see also § 193), @[śvā ca śvāś ca śvānau] (see @[śvaśrūśvaśurau]); @[tad ca devadattaś ca tau], @[sā ca yajñadattaś ca tau], @[tad ca yajñadattaś ca yau] or @[tau]. In the case of words of the masc., fem. and neut. gender that of the neut. gender is retained, as @[tad ca devadattaś ca te]; @[tad ca devadattaś ca tāni] or @[tāni].