---
rule: §198
---

The following rules should be observed in arranging the various members of a Dvandva Compound:—

(a) A word ending in @[i] or @[u] should be placed first, and when there are more than one of such words one of these should be placed first, the rest being arranged according to the will of the speaker or writer; @[hariharau], @[hariharakṛṣṇaḥ], @[harīśvarururudrāḥ], &c.

(b) Words beginning with a vowel and ending in @[ā] ought to precede others; as @[ambarākṣarāḥ] or @[īśvarāmbarāḥ]. This rule should have preference even over the above rule in case both would be simultaneously applicable; @[iṣukārmukaḥ].

(c) A word that has fewer syllables should be placed first and in case there are more words than one having an equal number of syllables, the one that has more short syllables should be placed first; e.g. @[kṣudhārtau], @[gṛhītavratau]. @[ātapī], &c.; the names of seasons were under this latter circumstance, should be arranged according to their astronomical order; as @[hemantaśiśiravasantāḥ], @[grīṣmavarṣaśarataḥ], &c. Also a word of more important significance should precede others; as @[arthakāmau].

(d) Names of the four castes of men should be arranged according to their order, beginning from the highest and so should be the names of brothers beginning from the eldest; e.g. @[brāhmaṇakṣatriyavaiśyaśūdrāḥ]; @[yudhiṣṭhirabhīmārjunau].

* @[pumānprājñuāyām] | Pāṇ. I. 2. 67.

† @[mātāpitarau svasāduhitṛbhyām] | @[pitā-mātā] | Pāṇ. II. 2. 68, 70.

‡ @[śvaśrūḥśvasurau] | @[tyadādīni sarvaivarṇitham] | Vār. I. 2. 71, 72.

× @[tadha ihanyate iti bhāṣyam] | Sid. Kau. on Pāṇ. I. 2. 72.

^ @[ī udau] | Pāṇ. II. 2. 32. @[anikalpādikeṣu ca niyamoaniyamaḥ śāstra] | Vārt.

†† @[ajādyantam] | Pāṇ. II. 2. 33.

‡‡ @[alpākṣaram] | Pāṇ. II. 2. 34. @[laghu akṣaram evam] | @[ṛtunakṣatrāṇāṃ samānākṣarāṇāmṛtupūrvyeṇa] | @[abhyarhite ca] | Vār.