---
rule: §222
---

An adjective may be compounded with the noun it qualifies in most cases as @[nīlaṃ ca utpalaṃ ca] = @[nīlotpalam], a blue lotus &c.; @[kṛṣṇaḥ sarpaś ca] = @[kṛṣṇasarpaḥ]; where the comp. is necessary; but @[śyāmadantayā striyā] | Such compounds are called @[viśeṣaṇapūrvapadakarmadhārayaḥ].

As a general rule in such compounds the qualifying word is placed first; but there are several exceptions which are given below.

- So when the common attribute is applicable in its expressed (@[abhihita]) sense to the @[upameyam] as in @[prabhātaṃ sahasram] dissolve the comp. as @[mukhaṃ padmam iva] and when to the @[upamānam] as in @[vikastaṃ padmam] dissolve as @[mukham iva padmam]

† @[viśeṣaṇaṃ viśeṣyeṇa bahulaṃ] | Pāṇ. II. 1. 57.

(a) The qualified word is placed first and is always of the mas. gender if it denotes a class or species, when compounded with certain adjectives; e. g. @[ibhayuvatī] 'a young female elephant', @[agnīṣokaḥ] 'a small fire', @[udakātipayam] 'butter-milk mixed with a little water', @[goprasuḥ] 'a cow that has brought forth a calf for the first time', @[godhenuḥ] 'a milch-cow (@[navaprasūtikā])'; @[govaṃśā] 'a barren cow', @[govadhāt] (@[garbhaghātinī goḥ]), @[govatsalyaṇī] 'a cow whose calf is one year old', @[kaṭhāgnihotrin] 'an agnihotrin brāhmaṇa of the Katha branch of the Yajurveda', @[kaṭhādhyāpakaḥ] 'a teacher of the Katha branch', @[gomataṅgikā-avaṅgikā-prakāṇḍa] (also mas. according to some) – @[uḍḍhaḥ] (@[vṛṣabhaḥ]) – @[udvāhaḥ] 'an excellent cow'. The last mentioned five words, all of which denote excellence, retain their own gender invariably; as @[brāhmaṇamataṅgikā] 'an eminent brāhmaṇa' &c.; but @[kumārī mataṅgikā], as no class is meant here.

(b) The words @[kaḍāraḥ], @[kakkaḥ], @[khoḍaḥ] lame, @[kāṇaḥ], @[kuṇḍaḥ] blunt, dull, @[mūḍhaḥ] bald-headed, @[gauraḥ], @[ṛddhaḥ], @[vāguraḥ] fan, @[piṅgalaḥ], @[babhruḥ], @[kaṭhinaḥ] hard, stiff, @[śliṣṭaḥ], @[caruḥ] and @[malaḥ], may optionally precede the words in apposition to them, as @[jaiminī kaḍāraḥ] or @[kaḍāra jaiminiḥ] 'Jaimini who is turned tawny on account of his having practised penance in the sun,' &c.

(c) Words expressive of the persons or things condemned

@[īḍayuvatīstokakatipayedṛśōrasuvatsavātsālyaṇīpravakṛṣya adhyāpakadhutejīvatī | Bhūṣaṇakāramadhārayājātīyadhīkīyeṣu] Pāṇ. II. 1. 65. VI. 3. 42.

@[mataṅgikādayo niyatalingāntuḥ viśeṣyanalinnaḥ] Sid. Kau. @[Mataṅgikāvavaṅgikāprakāṇḍoḍḍhadvilvajāḥ prakṛṣṭavṛṣavācakānyamāni] Amara.

@[kaḍārāḥ karmadhāraye] Pāṇ. II. 2. 38.

@[kutsitāni pūrvāṇi | Pūrvāṇikutsitāni | Pāṇāne kutsitaiḥ] Pāṇ. II. 1. 53-54. @[kiṃś ca] Pāṇ. II. 1. 64.

or reproached are placed first; as @[kutsitavyākaraṇaḥ] 'a bad grammarian', 'one who has forgotten his grammar and therefore can make no use of his knowledge', (@[pṛṣṭaḥ san yatnād vismārayitvā eva avṛttyabhyāsavedhuryāt sa ekṣaṭhyate] Tatv.); so @[nāstikamīmāṃsakaḥ] 'a mīmāṃsaka who is a sceptic' or 'an unbeliever', except in the case of the words @[pāpa], @[aṇaka] and @[kim]; e. g. @[pāpanapitaḥ] 'a bad barber', @[aṇakakulālaḥ] 'a mean, silly potter', @[kutsitaḥ rājā kirājaḥ], @[kiṃsakhā] (@[kutsitaḥ sakhā]), &c.

(d) Words in apposition to @[candrā], @[nāga] and @[śukhara] are also placed first; e. g. @[candravijayaḥ] 'an eminent king', @[pāpānakharaḥ], @[gomaśukhareḥ], &c.

(e) @[Katara] and @[katama] are compounded only when they ask a question with reference to a class (@[jāti] family), and are placed first; e. g. @[katara-katama-kaṭhaḥ] 'which brāhmaṇa of the Katha branch'? @[katara-katama-kalāpaḥ] 'which brāhmaṇa of the Kalāpa branch'? But @[kataraḥ putraḥ] 'which son'?

(f) The word @[kumāra] (and also @[kumārī] changed to @[kumāra]) is placed first when compounded with one of the words @[śramaṇā], @[pravrajitā], @[kulaṭā], @[garbhiṇī], @[tāpasī], @[dāsī], @[adhyāpakaḥ], @[paṇḍitaḥ], @[śuṣkaḥ], @[snigdhaḥ], @[sādhvī], @[capalā] etc. @[nibhaḥ]; as @[kumāraśramaṇā] 'a female mendicant', @[kumārapravrajitā] 'a young female ascetic'; @[kumāraśuṣkaḥ-ā] 'a delicate boy or girl', @[kumāragarbhiṇī], @[kumārādhyāpakaḥ], &c.

(g) The words @[eka], @[ardha], @[jarad], @[purāṇa], @[nava] and @[balaḥ] and the

@[candrānāgakharaḥ parājīvyamānam] Pāṇ. II. 1. 62.

@[katarakatamau jātiparipṛcchane] Pāṇ. II. 1. 63.

@[kumāraḥ śramaṇādibhiḥ] Pāṇ. II. 1. 70.

@[ekārdhiṅgasarvajāradpurāṇanavābaleḥ samānādhikaraṇena] Pāṇ. II. 1. 49. @[Pūrvāparaprathamamadhyamottamavarajaghaṇyasamānamadhyamādhyamārdvarāś ca] Pāṇ. II. 1. 58. @[Avarasya praśaṃso bhāvo vaktavyaḥ]