---
rule: §233
---

Compounds of the following words with verbal indeclinables are called @[gati].

(a) The particles @[ūrṇī], @[uśrī], @[vaṣaṭ], @[svadhā], @[svāhā], @[prāduḥ], @[āt] and @[śrat] and the word @[kārikā] meaning an action; as @[ūrṇīkṛtya], @[uśrīkṛtya] 'having accepted', @[vaṣaṭkṛtya] 'having uttered the word Vaṣaṭ;' @[prādurbhūya], @[kārikākṛtya] 'having done the act.'

(b) Onomatopoetic words not followed by @[iti], as @[khaṭkṛtya]; but @[khaṭ] @[iti] @[kṛtvā] (@[nirāṭśīvat]).

* @[kugatiprādayaḥ]. Pāṇ. II. 2. 18. @[pra] @[ādayaḥ] @[samānāya] @[prathamayā]. @[upa] @[ādayaḥ] @[karmaṇi] @[arthe] @[dvitīyayā]. @[ati] @[ādayaḥ] @[ṣaṣṭhi] @[arthe] @[tṛtīyayā]. @[pari] @[ādayaḥ] @[glāna] @[arthe] @[caturthyā]. @[nir] @[ādayaḥ] @[krāntāḥ] @[pañcamyā]. @[karmapravacanīyānāṃ] @[pratiṣedhaḥ]. Vārtikas.

† @[ūrṇādiṣu] @[ca]. Pāṇ. I. 4. 61. @[kārikāśabdasya] @[upasaṃkhyānam]. Bhāṣyas.

‡ @[avyayībhāvaś] @[ca] @[śabdāt] @[anīti] @[parat]. Pāṇ. I. 4. 62.

(c) The words @[sat] and @[asat] showing respect and disrespect, respectively, the prepositions @[alaṃ] in the sense of 'adorning,' @[puraḥ], @[prāk], @[ataḥ], @[kaṇe], @[manaḥ], @[astaṃ], @[accha], and @[tiraḥ]; as @[alaṃkṛtya] 'having adorned', but @[alaṃ kṛtvā] doing enough (@[paryāpti] @[arthaka] Sid. Kau.); @[puraskṛtya] 'placing in the front'; @[prākkṛtya] (@[pūrvatara]); @[antarkṛtya] (@[madhye kṛtvā] Sid. Kau.); @[kaṇekṛtya], as @[kaṇekṛtya payaḥ pibati] 'he drinks milk to his heart's content'; @[acchoktvā] 'having gone up to and spoken' (@[abhimukhaṃ gatvā uktvā ca ity arthaḥ] Sid. Kau.); @[tirobhūya], @[manobhūya] (till disgust is produced); @[astaṃgatya], @[acchagatya] 'going towards.'

(2) †The words @[haste], @[pāṇau] and @[prādvam]; as @[hastekṛtya], @[pāṇikṛtya] 'having married'; @[prādvaṃkṛtya] 'having forced to yield.'

(3) ‡The particles @[upāñje], @[anvāñje], @[sākṣāt], @[mithyā], @[amā], @[prāduḥ], @[ākiḥ] and @[namaḥ]; the words @[hnasi], @[urasi], (except when there is the sense of juxtaposition or extreme contact); @[madhye], and the word @[lavaṇa] form compounds with verbal indeclinables optionally; as @[upāñjekṛtya], @[upāñje kṛtvā], @[anvāñjekṛtya] @[anvāñje kṛtvā] 'giving strength to a weak' [@[durbalasya balaṃ datvā ity arthaḥ] Sid. Kau.]; @[sākṣātkṛtya-tvā], @[lavaṇaṃkṛtya-tvā], @[urasikṛtya-tvā] (having accepted) @[hnasikṛtya-tvā]; but @[urasi kṛtvā pāṇi datte]; @[madhye kṛtya], @[amākṛtya], @[prādukṛtvā], &c.

(d) These compounds are also formed with nouns derived from roots for their second members; e.g. @[astamaḥ] 'setting of the sun,' @[puraḥsaraḥ] 'reception, showing respect,' @[tiraskāraḥ], @[satkāraḥ], @[alaṃkaraḥ], &c.