---
rule: §239
---

The following words, when at the end of a Tatpuruṣa, drop the final vowel, together with the following consonant if there be any, and add @[a] under the circumstances mentioned:—

(a) @[rātri] when preceded by a numeral, an indeclinable, a word expressive of a part of the whole, such as @[pūrva], @[apara], &c., or by the words @[sarva], @[saṃkhyāta] and @[puṇya]; as @[dvayoḥ rātryoḥ samāhāraḥ] @[dvirātram] an aggregate of two nights (Dwi.); @[atikrānto rātrim asi] @[atirātram] that has passed a night, the dead of night; @[pūrvā rātriḥ] @[pūrvarātram] the first part of the night, @[sarvā rātriḥ] @[sarvarātram], @[saṃkhyātā rātriḥ] @[saṃkhyātarātram], @[puṇyā rātriḥ] an auspicious night.

The same happens when @[rātri] is preceded by @[ahan] in a Dwandwa; as @[ahaś ca rātriś ca] @[ahorātram].

(b) @[rājan], @[ahan] and @[sakhi]; @[paramaḥ rājā] @[paramarājaḥ] a great king, @[madrāṇāṃ rājā] @[madrarājaḥ], @[uttamaṃ ahaḥ] @[uttamāhaḥ] an excellent day, @[ekaṃ ca ahaś ca] @[ekāhaḥ]; @[dvayoḥ samāhāraḥ] @[dvyaham], @[tryaham], @[saptāham], &c. @[puṇyam ahaḥ] @[puṇyāham] a holy day, @[viṣṇoḥ sakhā] @[viṣṇusakhā] (vide § 245. c.), @[kṛṣṇasya sakhā] @[kṛṣṇasakhā] &c.

(c) Exception:—@[ahan] when preceded by an indeclinable, or a word denoting a part of the whole, or by @[sarva] or by a numeral with a @[taddhita] affix added to the whole compound, becomes @[addha]; @[atikrāntam ahaḥ] exceeding a day (in duration) @[atyaddham], @[pūrvaddham] forenoon, @[sarvaddham] the whole day, @[dvyaddham], @[tryaddham] @[dvāv ahnī] @[dvyaddhikam] (adj. fem.), @[dvyaddhakam] &c.; with @[saṃkhyāta], the change is optional; as @[saṃkhyātāddham] or @[saṃkhyātāhaḥ].

N. B. The @[n] of the substitute is changed to @[ṇ] when preceded by @[r] belonging to the first member ending in @[a]; as @[sarvāhṇaḥ]; but @[parā ahaḥ] @[parāhṇaḥ] (as @[parā] ends in @[ā]).

(d) @[takṣan] when preceded by @[grāma] or @[kauṭa], and @[śvan] by @[ati] or an inanimate object with which it is compounded, e. g. @[grāmasya takṣā] @[grāmatakṣaḥ] a village carpenter i. e. one not very skilful,' @[kauṭaḥ svātantryaḥ] @[kauṭaḥ] (independent) @[ca asau takṣā ca] @[kauṭatakṣaḥ] 'an independent carpenter'; @[atiśvā] [@[vṛkaḥ]] 'fleeter than a dog', @[atiśvī] (worse than a dog's life) @[jīvikā]; @[ākarṣaḥ śvā iva] @[ākarṣaśvaḥ] 'a dog like i. e. bad or unlucky throw of dice,' but @[vānaraśvā] 'a monkey like a dog'.

(e) @[sakthi] when preceded by @[uccam], @[khaga] or @[pūrva] or by a word denoting an inanimate object with which it is compounded; @[uccamsaktham] 'the upper part of the thigh', @[śūdrasaktham] 'the thigh of a śūdra', @[pūrvasaktham], @[phalakam iva sakthi] @[phalakasaktham] 'a thigh like a board'.

(f) A numeral when compounded in a Tat. @[nirgatāni triṃśataḥ] @[nirgatāni dravyāṇi] (weight) more than thirty; @[nirgataḥ triṃśatād aṅgulyaḥ] @[nirtriṃśadaṅgulaḥ khargaḥ] a sword more than thirty fingers in length.

* @[aṅgulaś ca numud avyayāt] | Pāṇ. V. 4. 86. † @[ahaḥ sarvaikadeśasaṃkhyātapuṇyāś ca rātreḥ] | Pāṇ. V. 4. 87.
‡ @[rājñaḥ sakhībhyaṣ ṭac] | Pāṇ. V. 4. 91. § @[addho 'ṅga etebhyaḥ] | Pāṇ. V. 4. 88.
H. S. G. 10.