---
rule: §245
---

As a general rule a @[tatpuruṣa] compound follows the gender of the final noun.

Exceptions:—

(a) Compounds with @[prādi] and @[āpanna] for their first member and the @[prādi] compounds follow the gender of the words they qualify; @[prādikapatha] @[nara], @[prādikapathin] @[strī], @[niṣkopadhi] @[gaja] &c.

(b) A @[tatpuruṣa] ending in @[rājan], @[saha] and @[ahan] is masculine, except when @[rājan] is preceded by a numeral and @[ahan] by @[duṣ] and @[su]; e. g. @[pūrvarāja], @[anusaha], @[sāha], @[aharaha], @[gaṇarāja], @[duryāha], @[sudināha]; also that ending in @[pathā] (substituted for @[pathin], vide § 280) preceded by a numeral or an indeclinable; as @[traya] @[panthā] @[tripathā], @[virūpa] @[panthā] @[vipathā], a bad or a wrong way; but @[supanthā], @[atipanthā] as they do not end in @[pathā]; (see § 285)

(c) A collective @[dvigu] is neut.; but that ending in @[ī] is generally feminine, and that ending in @[a] is optionally so in which case it takes the termination @[ī]; @[pañcagavam] collection of five cows, @[trayāṇāṃ] @[lokānāṃ] @[samāhāra] @[trailokam]; but @[pañcapāyam], @[pañcadaśam], @[caturyugam] &c.; @[ṣaṇṇāṃ] @[bhadrāṇāṃ] @[samāhāra] @[ṣaḍbhadram], @[ṣaḍbhadrī]. The @[a] of final @[ana] is dropped and the @[dvigu] is optionally feminine @[pañcatakṣī-kam], (e. @[pañca] + @[takṣa] a carpenter)

- @[strīliṅgaṃ] @[dviṣat] @[tad] @[dhūma] @[upasarjanayo] | Pāṇ. II. 4. 26
  @[liṅgaṃ] @[prādisamāsebhyo] @[anyadekṣāt] @[laṅga] @[pūrvam] @[atisamāseṣu] | Vārt. @[satrāhāhāḥ] @[puṃsi] Pāṇ. II. 4. 29. @[asaṅkhyā] @[pathā] @[bā] | Sid. Kau. @[gaṇarājaḥ] @[pumān] @[ahan] @[yad] @[adi] @[pathā] | @[pathā] @[saṅkhyā] @[avyayādi] | Vārtikas.

† @[napuṃsakam] | Pāṇ. II. 4. 17. @[īstrī] @[rāntā] @[akaraṇo] @[dvigu] @[prāyaṃ] @[iṣṭa] | @[ānto] @[api] @[ano] @[nalopaś] @[ca] @[vā] @[strīdantaś] @[ca] @[striyām] | @[ṣaṭtakṣam] @[na] | Vārtikas on ibid.

(d) A @[tatpuruṣa] ending in @[upajñā] and @[upakrama] is of the neuter gender, when the idea of @[prathamam] 'being the first' of what is known or commenced (introduced) is meant to be expressed; @[pāṇinerupajñā] @[pāṇinīyam] @[upajñaṃ] @[granthaḥ] the work (Grammar) first taught or composed by Pāṇini. @[nandopakramaṃ] @[droṇaḥ] the @[droṇa] (a measure of corn) first brought into use in the reign of King Nanda.

(e) § A @[tatpuruṣa] ending in @[chāyā] is neuter when the objects casting the shade are many @[bahūnāṃ] @[ikṣūṇāṃ] @[chāyam].

(f) † A @[tatpuruṣa] having for its first member a synonym of @[rājan] (and not @[rājan] itself) or the words @[rakṣas], @[piśāca] &c. and @[sabhā] for its latter member is neuter; as @[nṛpasabham], @[kṣitisabham], a king's council; but @[rājasabhā]; @[rakṣaḥsabham], @[piśācasabham]; also that ending in @[samā] when it means 'a multitude', as @[strīsamam] 'an assembly of women', but @[strīsabhā] in the sense of @[strīsamāja].

(g) ‖ A @[tatpuruṣa] ending in @[senā], @[surā], @[chāyā], @[śālā] and @[niśā] is optionally neuter; @[brāhmaṇasenā-nam], @[yavasurā-ram] malt liquor &c., @[kudyacchāyā-yam], the shadow of a wall; @[gośālā-lam], @[śvaniśā-śam] (the 14th day of the dark half of a month, so called because certain dogs observe a fast on this night, according to the Śābarabhāṣya).

N. B. These rules hold good in the case of Tat. alone; so @[dṛḍhaseno] @[rājā] (Bah.); @[asenā] (Neg. Tat.), @[paramasenā] (Karm.).

- @[upajñopakrame] @[prathamādhyāyine] Pāṇ. II. 4. 21. @[upajñā] @[jñānam] @[ādyam] | @[syāt] @[ārambhārtham] @[upakramaḥ] | Amara.

§ @[chāyā] @[bāhulye] | Pāṇ. II. 4. 20.

† @[samā] @[rājan-arthasyā-rṣa] @[śas] @[vā] | Pāṇ. II. 4. 23. @[paryāyasyaitad] @[iṣyate] Vār. | @[aśālā] @[ca] | Pāṇ. II. 4. 24. @[samana] @[śabdaḥ] @[rūḍhyā] @[rakṣaḥ] @[piśācādi] | @[nāma] | Sid. Kau.

‖ @[vibhāṣā] @[senāsurācchāyāśālāniśānām] | Pāṇ. II. 4. 25.