---
rule: §252
---

A compound of an indeclinable or a numeral or of @[upa], @[adūra] or @[adhika] with a numeral is a @[bahuvrīhi].‡ In the formation of such compounds the final vowel except that of @[ṣaṣ] and @[catuḥ], or the final consonant with the preceding vowel of the latter numeral and the @[śati] of @[viṃśati] are dropped and @[a] added; @[upari] @[samīpe] @[ye] @[santi] @[te] @[upadaśāḥ] 'about ten' i.e. nine or eleven; @[dvau] @[ca] @[trayaḥ] @[ca] @[dvitrayaḥ] 'two or three'; @[trayo] @[vā] @[catvāro] @[vā] @[tricaturaḥ]; @[dviḥ] @[āvṛttā] @[daśa] @[yasya] 'ten repeated twice i.e. twenty'; so @[tricaturaḥ] &c.; @[viṃśatiḥ] @[āsannāḥ] @[upaviṃśāḥ] 'nearly twenty', @[yato] @[adūrāḥ] @[triṃśat] @[adūratriṃśat] 'not far from thirty', @[adhikacatvāriṃśat] 'more than forty': but @[upaṣaḍ], @[upacatuḥ].† @[daśa] preceded by @[tri] or @[catur] does not drop any letter but simply has an @[a] added to it; @[trayaḥ] @[ca] @[daśa] @[vā] @[tridaśaḥ], @[catvāriṃśat] @[samīpe] @[ye] @[santi] @[te] @[upacaturaḥ].

- @[prādibhyo] @[dhātujasya] @[vācyo] @[vā] @[cottarapadalopaḥ] | @[nañoḥ] @[astyarthānāṃ] @[ca] @[yoge] @[ca] @[cottarapadalopaḥ] | Vārtikas on Pāṇ. II. 2. 24.

† @[tena] @[saheti] @[tulyayoge] | Pāṇ. II. 2. 28. @[sasajuṣaḥ] | @[pratyāsattau] | Pāṇ. VI. 3. 82-83. @[abho] @[vatsahaleṣviti] @[kāśyam] | Vārt. The restriction @[tulyayoge] is not universal as there are instances in which there is no equal participation; e.g. @[sagarbhaḥ], @[salomakam], @[sapaścakam] &c.; hence the Vṛttikāra says, @[prāyikaṃ] @[tulyayoge] @[iti] @[viśeṣaṇaṃ] @[anyathā] @[atulyayoge] @[api] @[samāso] @[dṛśyate] | Dikshit also says @[tulyayogaśravane] @[prāyikam] |

‡ @[saṃkhyayāvyayāsannadūrādhikaiḥ] @[saṃkhyāḥ] @[saṃkhyeye] | Pāṇ. II. 2. 25.