---
rule: §257
---

The following words lose their final vowel when at the end of a @[bahuvrīhi]:—

(a) The word @[pāda] when it is preceded by a numeral or @[su] or when the compound involves comparison and it is not preceded by a word of the @[hastyādi] group (@[hastin], @[aja], @[vṛṣabha], @[aśva], @[kapota], @[kurara], @[jāla], @[maṇḍa], @[dāsī], @[gaṇikā] and some others). @[dvau pādau yasya sa dvipadaḥ] a biped; @[supād] fair-footed; (@[vyāghrasya iva pādo yasya],) &c., but @[hastipādaḥ], @[kurulapādaḥ], &c.

(b) @[pāda] becomes @[pad] and the comp. takes @[ī] in the fem. in the case of the words @[kūrmapadī] and others (i. e. @[kūrmapadī], @[ekapadī], @[jālapadī], @[maṇḍapadī], @[hāsapadī], @[vipadī], @[supadī], @[dāsīpadī], @[viṣṇupadī], &c.;) but @[kūrmapadaḥ] Mas.

- @[dvābhyāṃ supyājñoḥ] Pāṇ. V. 4. 129. 130.

† @[jāyāyā ṇiḥ] Pāṇ. V. 4. 134. @[lopaḥ ṇyor vaci] Pāṇ. VI. 1. 66. @[jāyā] at the end of a Bah. substitutes @[ṇi] for its final @[ā]. The preceding @[y] or @[v] is dropped before a consonant except @[y].

‡ @[gandhasya itataṃ tadekādvayagrahaṇam] Pāṇ. V. 4.135. @[gandhasya iti] &c. Vārt. There is a difference of opinion among critics as to the meaning of the sū. @[gandhasya] &c. Some hold that the smell must be the natural property of a thing to necessitate the final @[i]. Cf. Jayamaṅgalā on Bhāṭṭi. @[ādrāṇivān gandhavahaḥ sugaṃdhiḥ] &c. 11. 10, and Mallinātha on Raṅg. IV. 45. But the view of such eminent grammarians as Kaiyaṭa, Bhaṭṭoji, Nāgeśa, &c. is as given above.

§ @[alpārthākhyayoḥ] | @[upamānākhyāt] Pāṇ. V. 4. 136-137.

¶ @[ac nāsikāyāḥ saṃjñāyāṃ nasaṃ cāśalāt] | @[upasargāc ca] Pāṇ. V. 4. 118. 119. @[naḥ vaktavyaḥ] | @[khayoḥ] Vārtikas.

** @[pūrvapadasya saṃjñāyām agoḥ] | @[khapasargād rahalam] Pāṇ. VIII. 4. 3. 28.

†† @[padasya lopo'hastyādibhyaḥ] | @[saṃkhyā supaśca] Pāṇ. V. 4. 138. 140.

‡‡ @[kūrmapadīṣu] Pāṇ. V. 4. 139.