---
rule: §279
---

The following Avyayībhāva compounds are anomalous¶:—

- @[prāg madhye ṅyāp ca] | Pāṇ. II. 1. 18.

† @[ānantaryam ādhvaryeṇa] | Pāṇ. II. 1. 19. @[vaṃśo vidyā vaktṛjanyānāṃ ca] | Ibid. Kār.

‡ @[nadībhiś ca] | Pāṇ. II. 1. 20 @[samāhāre syād ayam iti yat syāt] | Vārt.

†† @[nadyākhyānāṃ ca saṃjñāyām] | Pāṇ. II. 1. 21.

¶ @[viśiṣṭādhikaraṇayoge 'ṃśini ca] | Pāṇ. II. 1. 17.

@[dohanam], @[vṛṣagam]: @[yasmin kāle sa tiṣṭhan dohanam kālaḥ] 'the time when cows resort for being milked;' see Bhaṭṭi, IV. 14. So @[vṛṣagam] 'the time when cows conceive or bulls bear the plough; @[jāyante vā gāvaḥ asmin kāle āgacchanti vā gāvaḥ] 'the evening time,' 'the time when the cows come home', @[khaḷagatam], 'the time when the barley is on the threshing ground;' similarly @[khaḷagatayavam]; @[dyūnayavam] 'when barley is reaped,' @[dyūmānayavam]... @[saṃhṛtayavam], &c. @[samabhūmi] 'when the ground is even;' @[samapadāti] 'when the foot-soldiers are in right lines;' @[samāntam], @[viṣamam], @[apasama] 'at the end of the year;' @[āyatīsamam], @[pāpasama] 'in an evil year;' @[puṇyasama], @[prāyam], @[bharatham] 'when the chariots move forth,' @[prasṛtam] 'when the deer comes,' @[viṣagam], @[śradakṣiṇam], @[śrutam] and @[sutam].

N. B.—According to all followers of Pāṇ. compounds of this group are precluded from being * @[para] compounded though poets do not seem to respect the prohibition except in so far as to place such words at the end of these comps.; cf. @[ahar ahar- kriyānvāyam] | Ragh. I. 76; also IV. 25, VII. 24, &c.