---
rule: §295
---

@[samāna] becomes @[sa]—

(a) when followed by the words @[jyotis], @[janapada], @[rāji], @[nābhi], @[nāman], @[rūpa], @[sthāna], @[varṇa], @[vayas], @[ayana], and @[bandhu]; @[samānaṃ jyotiḥ asya sajyotiḥ] 'kind of mourning which lasts from the rising of the sun or a particular collection of stars to its setting. (@[samānaṃ jyotir asyeti bahuvrīhiḥ | yasmim jyotiṣi sūrye nakṣatre vā saṃjātaṃ tad-astamaya-paryantam anuvartamānam aucaṃ sajyotir ity ucyate] |' Tat. Bod.); @[sajanapadaḥ] belonging to the same country; @[sarājiḥ]; @[sanābhiḥ] 'connected by the same navel, sprung from the same ancestor,' &c.

(b) when followed by the word @[brahma-cārin] † 'a student of the veda who belongs to the same śākhā or branch as another,' @[samānaḥ śākhādhyāyī sabrahma-cārī].

(c) when followed by @[tīrtha] with the Tad. affix @[ya] added to it; as @[samāne tīrthe vāsī satīrthyaḥ] 'a disciple of the same preceptor,' and optionally when followed by @[udara] under the same circumstances; @[samāne udare garbhitaḥ saudaraḥ] or @[samānodaryaḥ] 'born of the same womb,' 'a brother by whole blood.'

(d) when followed by @[pakṣa], @[dharma] and @[jāti]; @[sapakṣaḥ], @[sadharmaḥ], @[sajātiḥ]: †

(e) ‡ and in the case of compounds like @[sapakṣa], @[sādharmya], @[sajātīya], &c.

- @[jyotir-janapada-rāji-nābhi-nāma-rūpa-sthāna-varṇa-vayo-'yana-bandhuṣu | caraṇe cāśiṇi | tīrthye ca | vibhāṣodare] | Pāṇ. VI. 3. 85-89. @[śākhādi prāgdivāt | Kāś].

† @[caraṇaḥ śākhā, tasya adhyāyī śākhādhyāyī | tad-adhyayanāt sabrahmacārī iti vigrahaḥ] | Sk:

‡ @[samānasya saḥ pakṣa-dharma-jātiṣu] | Pāṇ. VI. 3. 84. The proper meaning of this sūtra is that the word @[samāna] is changed to @[sa] in the veda when followed by any other word than @[pakṣa], @[dharma],