---
rule: §297
---

† @[anya] in any other case than the Inst. and the Gen. is changed to @[anyad], when followed by @[āśis], @[ājñā], @[āsthā], @[āsthita], @[utsuka], @[ūti] or @[rāga]; @[anyā āśīḥ anyadāśīḥ] 'another blessing'; @[anyā ājñā anyadājñā] 'another desire'; @[anyadāsthā], 'devotion or attachment to another'; @[anyadāsthitaḥ] 'resorting to another'; @[anyadutsukaḥ]; 'eager for another'; @[anyā ūtiḥ anyadūtiḥ], @[anyaḥ rāgaḥ anyadrāgaḥ]; these @[anyasya anyena vā āśiṣi] and @[udara]; @[anyasya garbhitaḥ sagarbhyaḥ] (@[samāno garbhaḥ sagarbhaḥ tasya bhāvaḥ]); @[anyasya yūtham sayūthyaḥ sanityaḥ] &c.; but @[samānāśiṣaḥ], @[samarāga-pravṛttayaḥ], @[sautsukyaḥ] | But

as compounds like @[sapakṣa] &c., cannot be properly explained by any of the sūtras following this, grammarians like Vāmana think that the portion @[samānasya] ought to be separated from this sūtra and considered as a separate sūtra by itself; Bhaṭṭoji Dīkṣita conforms to this opinion of Vāmana, but following Haradatta suggests that the @[sa] in compounds like @[sapakṣa] may also be taken to be a substitute for @[saha] meaning 'like or similar to,' the compounds being considered as Bahuvrīhis. @[samānasya saḥ ity atra vibhajyate | tena sapakṣaḥ, sādharmyaṃ sajātīyam ity ādi siddham iti kāśikā]. Tat. @[saha-śabdaḥ sadṛśārthako 'py asti | sapakṣaḥ sakhyā tulyaḥ pakṣo yasya | tena ayam asya ca vigrahaḥ bahuvrīhiḥ | samānaḥ pakṣo asya iti] | Sid. Kau.

— @[aṅguli-saṅge ca ṣaḥ | bhīroḥ sthānam | jyotir-āyuṣṭomaḥ kṣapāmādiṣu ca] | Pāṇ. VIII. 3. 80-81, 83. 98.

† @[abahucāturthyāsyasyānyasya tad-āśiṣ-ājñ-āsthāsthita-utsuk-ūti-kāra-aṅga-rāgeṣu saḥ | ayaṃ vibhāṣā] | Pāṇ. VI. 3. 99. 100.

@[ācāryādiṣu]; also when followed by @[kāraka] and the Tad. affix @[ka] in which case @[ta]-restriction is removed; @[anyasya kārakaḥ anyatkārakaḥ]; @[anyasmin deśaḥ]; and optionally when followed by @[artha]. @[anyasyārthaḥ] — different meaning &c.