---
rule: §299
---

The vowel of the first member is lengthened in the following cases:—

@[pṛṣodarādīni yathopadiṣṭam] Pāṇ. VI. 3. 109.

† @[mṛgāntargamād rhamaḥ siṃho gaṇedhiṣayāt] | @[ulūkhaṃ varṇabharutarbhanākṣat pṛṣodarāya] || Sid. Kau.

‡ @[diṅśabdebhyas tīrasya taraḥ syād vā] | Vārttika.

§ @[duro ḍāṅnākaśamaṣyeṣṛtvad battaraṣadāveḥ kvip ca] | Vārttika.

¶ @[nahukṣatiravyayirucisahitanīṣu ktau] | @[vatau, mato bahucorāja kirādīnāṃ ca] | @[śarādīnāṃ ca] | @[upasargasya ṣaḍupamaṇuṣye bahulam] | @[ikaḥ pratyayāt aṣṭanaḥ senāyām] | @[ṛṣau saṃjñāyām] | @[mito ghañaḥ] Pāṇ. VI. 3. 116; 118-119, 122, 123, 125, 129, 130.

H. S. G. 12.

(a) When the nouns derived from the roots @[nah], @[kṣi], @[av], @[vyac], @[ruc], @[sah], and @[nī] with the aff. @[kṛt] (@deva[क्]) follow prepositions termed @[gati] or nouns which they govern; @[upānah], @[avikṣ] an inhabited country, a realm, @[nivṛt] the rainy season, @[mamāvit] piercing the vitals; so @[mṛgāvit] a hunter (cf. Bhaṭṭi II. 7). @[nīruk], @[prabhīruk], @[pratyāruk] overpowering an assailant @[prāruk]. But @[parihvayaḥ] as @[hvā] is not followed by @[kṛt].

(b) When followed by the aff. @[vat], and the whole is a name; @[kṛṣīvalaḥ] a husbandman.

(c) Words containing more than two vowels when followed by @[matup] (@deva[वत्]) except in the case of @[ajira], @[khadira], @[bhindi], @[ikṣu], @[kāraṇḍava] and @[cakravāka] and the whole is a name; @[amarāvatī] and @[irāvatī] which are names; but @[ajirāvatī]; @[bṛhimatī], @[yavamatī] which is not a name. Also in the case of @[śara], @[vaṃśa], @[sāra], @[ahi], @[grīvā], @[tāla], @[yāca], and @[yaha]; @[śarāvatī] &c.

(d) When a verbal derivative with the aff. @[aṇ] (@deva[घञ्]) follows a preposition, in most cases, when the comp. does not signify a human being, @[parigaṇaḥ-parīgāṇaḥ]; but @[niṣādaḥ] one of a mountain-tribe. Similarly @[nī-hāraḥ]; @[prati-nī-hāraḥ] &c.

(e) When @[prāṇa] follows a preposition ending in @[i]; @[vipāṇaḥ], @[vipāṇaḥ]; but @[prakāśaḥ].

(f) When @[aṣṭan] is the first, and @[pad] the second member of a compound, and the whole is a name; @[aṣṭāpat] gold, @[aṣṭāpāt] a spider; but @[aṣṭa-indavaḥ], @[vindvān-naraḥ] an epithet of Savitṛ.

(g) When @[ṛṣi] is the latter member and the whole is the name of a ṛṣi; @[viśvāmitra-ṛṣiḥ], but @[viśvamitro māṇavakaḥ].