---
rule: §312
---

The words @[indra], @[varuṇa], @[bhava], @[śarva], @[rudra], @[mṛḍa], and @[ājagara]; @[hima] and @[araṇya] both implying 'vastness'; @[yava] meaning 'bad or spoiled barley', @[yavana] when the feminine denotes the alphabet of the Yavanas, @[mātula] and @[ācārya] form their fem. in @[ī] but insert @[ān] before this @[ī] e.g. @[indrāṇī] 'the wife of Indra;' @[varuṇānī] 'the wife of Varuṇa', &c.; @[himānī] 'a vast sheet of ice,' @[araṇyānī] 'an immense expanse of forests,' @[yavaḥ] @[yavo yavānī], @[yavanānāṃ] @[lipiryavānī], but @[yavanī] 'the wife of a Yavana or Yavana woman,' @[mātulānī] @[ācāryāṇī] 'the wife of an Ācārya or a holy teacher', but @[ācāryā] 'a woman who teaches; a spiritual preceptress'.

- @[puṃyogādākhyāyām] Pāṇ. IV. 1. 48. @[gaveritīti] @[vācyaḥ].
  @[strīdvyatyayācāryācca] Vārtika.

† @[indravaruṇabhavaśarvarudramṛḍahimāraṇyayavayavanamātulācāryāṇāmānuk] Pāṇ. IV. 1. 49. @[himāraṇyayorviśālatve] @[yavājāt] @[yavanāllipiām] Vārtikas.

‡ @[ākhyāyādaṇatvaṃ ca] Vārtika.

(a) The words @[mātula] and @[upādhyāya] insert this @[ān] optionally; @[mātulānī] @[mātulī]; @[upādhyāyānī], @[upādhyāyī]; 'the wife of a preceptor,' but @[upādhyāyanī] or @[upādhyāyā] 'a female preceptor', 'a woman who herself performs the work of an @[upādhyāya]'; in the case of @[vaiśya] and @[kṣatriya], @[ān] is optionally inserted before the @[ī] when no wife is meant— @[vaiśyānī-vaiśyī], 'a mistress or a woman of the Vaiśya or trader class', @[kṣatriyā], @[kṣatriyāṇī] 'a woman of the Kṣatriya or warrior class', @[vaiśyā] 'the wife of a Vaiśya'; @[kṣatriyī] 'the wife of a Kṣatriya.'