---
rule: §373
---

In the following list are alphabetically arranged almost all the words used adverbially in Sanskrit:—

@[akasmāt] Suddenly, all at once.
@[agrataḥ] In front of, before.
@[agre] In front of, before, ahead, at first.
@[agre]
@[acirāt] Not long since, recently, quickly.
@[acire]
@[acirāya]
@[ajasram] Ever, constantly.
@[ajñānataḥ] Through ignorance.
@[añjasā] Rightly, correctly, properly.
@[antar] In, into.
@[ataḥ] From this, on this account &c.

@[atīva] Exceedingly, rising superior to, with the Acc. @[atīvānyān bhaviṣyāvaḥ] M. B.
@[atra] Here.
@[atha] Then, afterwards.
@[atha vā] Yes.
@[addhā] Truly, certainly, indeed.
@[adya] To-day, this day.
@[adyatve] Now, now-a-days.
@[adhaḥ] Below, down.
@[adhastāt]
@[adharam] Again, moreover.
@[adhaḥparaḥ] On the following day.
@[adhunā] Now, at this time.

@[aniśam] Incessantly, ceaselessly.
@[antareṇa] Except, without.
@[antarā] Inside.
@[antarāle]
@[anyac ca] Again, moreover, besides.
@[anyat]
@[anyatra] Elsewhere, in another place.
@[anyathā] Otherwise, in a different manner.
@[abhitaḥ] Near, close by, in the proximity of.
@[abhīkṣṇam] Frequently, repeatedly.
@[amū] Quickly, little.
@[amā] Together with, in company with.
@[amutra] There, in the next world, above.
@[aram] Quickly.
@[arvāk] Before.
@[alam] Enough, sufficient for. It is a prefix also.
@[bahiḥ] Without, on the outside.
@[asakṛt] Repeatedly, often and often.
@[asakṛdbahiḥ]
@[asā] Improperly, unfitly.
@[asāmprataṃ] Instantly, speedily.
@[asākāśam] Uninterruptedly, one after another.
@[asakyām]

@[ārāt] Near, in the vicinity of, at a distance.
@[ārabdham] Forcibly [Pāṇ. I. 1. 47].
@[itaḥ] Hence.
@[itastataḥ] Hither and thither, to and fro, here and there, &c.
@[iti] In this manner, so.
@[itaraḥ] Again.
@[itaredyuḥ] On another day, the other day.
@[itihā] Thus, indeed, quite in conformity to tradition.
@[ittham] Thus, so, in this manner.
@[idānīm] Just now, at this moment.
@[idam] Truly.
@[iha] Here.
@[īṣat] Slightly, little.
@[uccaiḥ] Loudly.
@[uttarataḥ] Then.
@[uttaratra]
@[uttarasyām] On the day following.
@[upāṃśu] Secretly, in private.
@[ubhayataḥ] From both sides.
@[ubhayatra] On both days.
@[ubhayasmin]
@[ubhayedyuḥ]
@[uṣasi] Early in the morning, at dawn.
@[ṛju] Truly, truthfully.
@[ṛte]