---
rule: §395
---

The penultimate @[a], @[i], @[ṛ] or @[u] of a root, followed by a @[ghañ] is lengthened when a consonant follows; i.e. † @[miv] 1. A. to measure, to play, @[mīvate]; similarly @[div], @[riv], @[niv] all A. and meaning to play, @[jiv] to act dishonestly, to be crooked, @[śiv] to faint, @[syiv] to spread, to forget; @[skun] to thunder, to shine; @[uś], @[tud], @[rud], @[muṣ], @[yudh] all meaning to kill, @[yut] to try, @[mud], &c., all Parasmai. and belonging to the 1st class, lengthen their penultimate vowel; @[div] 4. P. @[dīvyati]; similarly @[siv] has @[sīvyati], @[riv] @[rīvyati], &c.

**ROOTS OF THE 1ST, 4TH, 6TH, AND 10TH CLASSES WHICH FORM THEIR BASES IRREGULARLY.**

**1st class (@[bhvādayaḥ]).**

@[gup] ‡ 'to protect,' @[gopāyati]; @[paṇ] 'to prize,' @[paṇāyate]; but @[paṇate] when it means 'to barter or transact business, to bet.' @[dhūp] 'to heat,' @[dhūpāyati].
@[vicch] 'to go,' @[vicchāyati].

---

* @[ata iddhātoḥ] । @[uraṇ raparaḥ] । Pāṇ. VII. 1. 100, I. 1. 51. @[hali ca] । I. 2. 26. VII. 2. 77.

† @[ghañ ca] । Pāṇ. VII. 3. 36. Meaning: @[dhātoḥ upadhāyā iko dīrghaḥ syāt ghañi] । 81a. Kan.

‡ @[gupūdhūpavicchipaṇipanibhya āyaḥ] । Pāṇ. III. 1. 28. These roots insert @[āya] before @[a]. The vowel of @[gup] takes @[guṇa] substitute before this @[āya].

@[guḍ] A. 'to conceal, to keep secret,' @[gūḍhate].

@[kam] A. 'to wish,' @[kāmayate].

@[cam] P. 'to sip,' @[cāmati].

@[cam] with @[ā] 'to sip,' @[ācāmati].

@[bhāj] and @[mlā] A. 'to shine,' @[bhājyate], @[bhāsyate], @[mlāyate], @[mlādayate].

@[naś] P. A. 'to perish,' @[naśyati-te].

@[bhram] P. 'to roam,' @[bhramati], @[bhramyati], @[bhramyate].

@[kram] P. 'to walk,' @[krāmati], @[krāmyati].

@[iṣ] P. A. 'to desire,' @[iṣati-te], @[iṣyati-te].

@[dhinv] § P. 'to please,' @[sinoti].

@[hiṃs] P. 'to kill, to hurt,' @[hinasti].

@[aś] P. 'to pervade,' @[aśnāti], @[aśnoti].

@[takṣ] P. 'to pare, to square,' @[takṣṇoti].

@[ṛt] 'to reproach,' 'to pity,' @[ṛṇīyate], @[gacchati].

@[bhaj] P. 'to apportion,' @[bhajati].

@[yam] P. 'to restrain,' @[yacchati].

@[pā] P. 'to drink,' @[pibati].

@[ghrā] P. 'to smell,' @[jighrati].

@[dham] P. 'to blow,' @[dhamati].

@[sthā] P. 'to stand,' @[tiṣṭhati].

@[man] P. 'to think,' @[manati].

@[dā] P. 'to give,' @[yacchati].

@[pay] P. 'to see,' @[payati].

@[ṛ] P. 'to go,' @[ṛcchati].

* @[udūpadhāyā morvā]. Pāṇ. VI. 4. 89. The penultimate @[u] of @[ṛ] is lengthened in the Special Tenses and before a strong termination beginning with a vowel.

† @[hibahasacamām] @[śini]. Pāṇ. VII. 3. 75. @[ete cama iti vaktavyam]. Vār. These roots lengthen their vowel in the Special Tenses.

‡ @[bhājmlāśaśrasicara haṣakaṣañciṭilaṣaḥ]. Pāṇ. III. 1. 70. These roots take the @[ya] of the 4th class optionally in the Special Tenses.

@[dhinviṅṛṇvyośca]. @[eco'lopaḥ]. Pāṇ. III. 1. 87. VI. 4. 48. The roots @[dhinvu] and @[ṛṇu] substitute @[na] for their @[va] and then add the augment @[u] (before which the @[na] is dropped). These are then conjugated like roots of the 5th class.

‖ @[aś] and @[takṣ] when it means to make thin, belong to the 5th class optionally.

¶ @[iṣugamiyamām] @[chaḥ] (@[che ca]. see § 44.) Pāṇ. VII. 3. 77.

** @[pāghrāvyāspāśadahakathhadīriśasadāṃ pibajighradhamatithiṣṭhamanayaccha payaṛcchādhārīyatīdāḥ]. Pāṇ. VII. 3. 78.

@[dhāv] P. 'to run,' @[dhāvati].

@[hrī] P. (*A.) 'to perish,' @[hrīyate].

@[sad] P. to sit, to wither, &c., @[sīdati].

@[daṃś] P. to bite, @[daśati].

@[sañj] P. to adhere, @[sajati].

@[svañj] A. to embrace, @[svajate].

@[rañj] P. A. to dye, @[rajati], @[rajate].

@[śuc] P. to be clean, @[śucati].

@[jambh] A. to yawn, @[jambhate].

@[arh] A. to be adequate, @[arhate].

@[vrīḍ] A. to blush, @[vrīḍate].

@[sap] P. 'to be ready,' @[saptati].