---
rule: §504
---

The roots that reject @[iṭ] altogether in the perfect—

@[kṛ] P. A. 'to do'

@line:

1. cakāra, cakara cakṛva cakṛma cakre cakṛvahe cakṛmahe
2. cakartha cakrathāḥ cakra cakṛṣe cakrāthe cakṛdhve
3. cakāra cakratuḥ cakruḥ cakre cakrāte cakrire
   :@

Conjugate similarly @[hṛ], @[gṛ], and @[vṛ] except in the 2nd per. sing. which is @[vavartha].

But @[kṛ] with @[sam]†

@line:

1. saṃscakāra, saṃscakara saṃscakṛva saṃscakṛma saṃscakre saṃscakṛvahe saṃscakṛmahe
2. saṃscartha saṃscakrathāḥ saṃscakra saṃscakṛṣe saṃscakrāthe saṃscakṛdhve
3. saṃscakāra saṃscakratuḥ saṃscakruḥ saṃscakre saṃscakrāte saṃscakrire
   :@

† @[saṃskaroti] @[bhūṣaṇe]. @[sam] @[ca]. @[upāt pratiyatnataḥ ṛtavākyā āhareṣu ca]

Pāṇ. VI. 1. 137—139. @[s] is prefixed to the root @[kṛ] after the prepositions @[sam] and @[nis] when it means to ornament or collect together; and after the preposition @[upa] in the above sense, as well as in the senses of 'imparting an additional quality to a thing without destroying the thing itself (@[sato guṇāntarādhānaṃ pratiyatnaḥ] Kas. on Pāṇ. III. 3, 53.) or preparing as food, or supplying what is implied.'

‡ The @[ṛ] is changed to Guṇa as it is preceded by a conjunct consonant now (Vide § 499. Sid. Kau. on Pāṇ VII. 1. 10-11.)

§ The @[v] of the terminations @[vahe], @[dhve], and @[va] of 2nd per. pl. of the benedictive, the aorist and the perfect, is changed to @[ḍh] when preceded by any vowel except @[a] or @[ā] or by @[y], @[r], @[h]. (Otherwise it is changed to @[ḍhv]).

When the intermediate @[i] is added, this change is optional, if the @[i] be preceded by one of the consonants given above.

@[vṛ] A.

@line:

1. vavāra vavṛva vavṛma vavre vavṛvahe vavṛmahe
2. vavṛtha vavṛathāḥ vavṛa vavṛṣe vavrāthe vavṛdhve
3. vavāra vavṛatuḥ vavṛuḥ vavre vavrāte vavrire
   :@

Conjugate similarly @[tṛ], @[spṛ], @[dṛ].