---
rule: §574
---

(a) In the @[parasmaipada], the final radical vowel and the penultimate @[a] of roots ending in @[r] or @[l] and that of @[vad] and @[svaṅ] take their @[vṛddhi] substitute necessarily; @[kū]—@[akāvīṣam]; @[car]—@[acārīṣam]; @[phal]—@[aphālīṣam], &c.

(b) The penultimate short vowel of a root takes its @[guṇa] substitute; @[budh]—@[abodhiṣam], &c.

(c) @[Vṛddhi] is optionally substituted for the penultimate @[a], not prosodially long, of roots having an initial consonant and not ending in @[ṅ] or @[l]; @[paṭ]—@[apatṭiṣam], @[apāṭīṣam]; @[gad]—@[agadīṣam], @[agādīṣam].

(d) But the vowel of roots ending in @[ṅ], @[yū], @[v], and of the roots @[kṣaṇ], @[śvas], @[vraśc], @[śvi], @[kaṭ] 'to cover, to surround,' @[caṭ] 'to break, to pierce,' @[chad], @[car] 'to ask, to beg,' @[path] 'to go or move,' @[math] 'to churn,' @[nam] 'to stick or cling to,' @[ham] and @[kṣam] 'to sound or to be diminished,' does not take its @[vṛddhi] substitute.

(e) In the @[ātmanepada] the radical vowel takes its @[guṇa] substitute; @[kū]—@[akūviṣṭa].

**Paradigms.**

@[stu]—@[astāvīṣam] 1 sing. @[astāvīt] 3 sing. | @[stu]—@[astavīṣi] 1 sing. @[astavīṣṭa] 3 sing.

@[i]—@[āyīṣam] 1 sing. @[āyīt] 3 sing. | @[i]—@[āyīṣi], @[āyīṣṭa] 1 sing.

@[vad] and @[svaṅ]—P. @[avādīṣam] 1 sing. @[avādīt] 3 sing.

@[stṛ]—@[astārīṣam] Par. @[astarīṣi], @[astarīṣṭa] Atm. 1 sing. | @[stu]—@[astāvīṣam] 1 sing. @[astāvīṣṭa] 3 sing.

@[astarīṣṭhāḥ-astarīṣṭhāḥ] 2 sing. | @[bhaj]—@[abhājīṣam] 1 sing. @[abhājīṣṭa] 3 sing.

@[vṛ], @[kṛ]—@[avarīṣam-avarīṣi] 1 sing. @[avarīṣva-avarīṣvahi, avarīṣvahi], &c. @[avarīṣṭhāḥ] or @[avarīṣṭhāḥ] Par. and Atm. 2 sing. &c. | @[han]—@[avadhīṣam], @[avadhīṣi] 1 sing. (See § 569).

@[kram]—@[akramīṣam] 1 sing. @[akramīt] 3 sing.

For the optional forms of these roots see the preceding Variety.

@[śvi]—@[aśvayīṣam] 1 sing. @[aśvayīt] 3 sing. | @[jāgṛ]—@[ajāgarīṣam], @[ajāgarīṣi] 1 sing.

@[jāgarīt] 3 sing. | @[vṛṣ]—@[atarpīṣam] 1 sing. @[atarpīt] 3 sing.

@[bhaj]—@[abhājīṣam] 1 sing. @[abhājīt] 3 sing. | @[śyam]—@[aśyamīṣam] 1 sing. @[aśyamīt] 3 sing.

@[vrāj]—@[avrājīṣam] 1 sing. @[avrājīt] 3 sing. | @[kṣam]—@[akṣamīṣi] 1 sing. @[akṣamīṣṭa] 3 sing.

@[viś]—7. P. @[aviśīṣam], 6. A. @[avivīṣi] 1 sing. | @[vyap]—@[avyapīṣam], @[avyape] 1 sing.

@[maṇ]—@[amāṇīṣam], @[amaṇīṣam] 1 sing. | @[ghar]—@[aghārīṣam] 1 sing.

@[vad]—@[avādīṣam] 1 sing. @[avādīt] 3 sing. | @[han]—@[ahanīṣam] 1 sing.

@[śvas]—@[aśvasīṣam] 1 sing. @[aśvasīt] 3 sing. | @[gāh]—@[agāhīṣi] 1 sing. @[agāhīṣṭa] 3 sing.

@[grah]—@[agrahīṣam], @[agrahīṣi] 1 sing. | @[guh]—@[ajūhīṣam], @[ajūhīṣi] 1 sing.

**Irregular Aorists of the Fifth Form.**