---
rule: §661
---

As already remarked there are two Padas in Sanskrit, the @[parasmaipada] and the @[ātmanepada]. The Parasm. denotes that the fruit of the action accrues to some one different from the agent, as @[pacati] 'he cooks for another,' @[kārayati] 'makes some one do something for another,' &c. The Atm. denotes that the fruit of the action is @[ātmane] i.e. it accrues to the agent, @[pacate] 'he cooks for himself,' @[kārayate] 'he makes another do something for himself,' &c.

(a) If, however, there be a word showing the accrual of the fruit of the action to the agent, the Atm. is optionally used, as @[svaṃ yajñaṃ yajate] or @[yajati] 'he offers his own sacrifice,' @[svaṃ kaṭaṃ kurute] or @[karoti] 'he weaves his own mat,' @[svaṃ yajñaṃ kārayati-te] &c.

(b) When the causal form of a transitive verb is used reflexively, or when the object in the primitive sense becomes the agent in the causal, the Atm. is used except in the sense of 'remembering with eagerness,' &c. @[bhaktāḥ śivaṃ paśyanti] 'devotees see Bhava;' @[śivaḥ bhaktān paśyate] 'Bhava shows himself to his devotees,' e.g. @[kānte pratyaṅmukhaṃ kokilāḥ smarayanti vanamukham] (Bil.); @[tasyāṃ priyāṃ praveśayate śivapitṛbhyaḥ] (Sid. Kau.). Vide Sid. Kau. on Pāṇ. I. 3, 67.

(c) When the agent of the action denoted by a verb cannot be other than an animal, the causal of the verb takes the Par. even when the action refers to the agent as @[kṛṣṇaḥ śete] 'Kṛṣṇa sleeps,' @[gopī kṛṣṇaṃ śāyayati] 'the cowherdess lulls Kṛṣṇa to sleep,' but @[phalaṃ patati] 'the fruit falls down,' @[vāyuḥ phalaṃ pātayati] 'the wind causes the fruit to fall down,' &c.

(d) In the case of verbs meaning 'to eat,' except @[aś], and 'to move,' their causals take the Parasm. even when the fruit of the action refers to the agent; @[bhakṣayati], @[āśayati] 'makes another eat,' @[khañjayati], @[kampayati], 'he shakes' &c.

Exceptions to (c) and (d)—to (c) @[śam] 'to pacify,' @[vā] with @[ā] 'to draw in,' @[yat] with @[ā] 'to endeavour,' @[parihṛ] 'to faint,' @[bhṛś] 'to shine,' @[lap] 'to speak,' @[vas] 'to dwell,' and @[pā] 'to drink;' to (d)—@[nṛt] 'to drink,' @[nṛt] 'to dance;' in the case of these roots the usual rule holds good; @[śamayati], @[śamayate]; @[kampayati-te] &c.

---

*This distinction, however, seems to be very little observed in practice. Even the best Sanskrit writers are found using both the Padas promiscuously. It cannot even be supposed that this distinction is meant to be observed where a root admits of both the Padas. The @[daśakumāracarita] and the @[kādambarī] afford several instances in which the two Padas are used exactly in the same sense.