---
rule: §664
---

The following is an alphabetical list of the roots that change their proper @[pada] after certain prepositions under the circumstances given in each case.

@[as]—when preceded by a preposition is conjugated in either @[pada]; @[bandhaṃ nirasya·ti-te].

with @[prati]—in the causal takes the Parasm. @[pratyāsayati].

@[ah]—when preceded by a preposition is conjugated in either @[pada]; @[pāpe apohati-te] 'he destroys sin;' @[tadapohati] 'discards,' @[ārohati-te] 'he gathers together.'

with @[sam] is Atm. @[samāraṃ mamāmīṣāḥ] Bh. VII. 16; 'all my desires have come to me i.e. are gratified.'

@[ṛcch] with @[sam]—is Par. when used transitively, and Atm. when used intransitively; @[samūrcchati] 'he collects; @[samūrcchate] 'is collected.'

@[kṛ]—without a preposition admits of either @[pada]. It is Parasm. with @[anu] and @[ā]*; @[anukaroti mamato nārāyaṇasya] (Kd), @[āṃ cakrurllajjitam] &c. (Bhaṭṭi. VIII. 50.); it is Atm. with a preposition in following senses:—(1) @[hiṃsana]† or 'hurting,' 'killing,' as @[utkurute] 'informs against (with a view to injure);' (2) @[avalepana] or 'censuring, overcoming;' @[udrākurute yeno vartikām] 'the hawk reproves the snail;' (3) @[sevana] or 'serving, attending upon,' as @[hariṃ upakurute] 'he serves Hari;' (4) @[sāhasikya] or 'acting violently,' 'outraging,' as @[paradārān prakurute] 'outrages another's wife;' (5) @[pratiyatna] or 'imparting an additional quality' (@[sato guṇāntarādhānam] Kashika), as @[edhaḥ udakasya upakurute] 'fuel imparts heat to water;' (6) @[prakathana] or 'reciting,' as @[gāthāḥ prakurute] 'recites stories from the Vedas;' (7) @[upayoga] or 'applying to use,' as @[śatam upakurute] (@[dharme śataṃ viniyuṅkte ityarthaḥ]) 'devotes a hundred (Rupees, &c.) to holy purposes,' cf. also Bhaṭṭi. VIII. 18.—with @[ā] it is Atm. in the sense of 'forgiving or overpowering;' @[śatrum adhikurute] 'forgives or overpowers his enemy,' @[nān manuṣyānadhikuroti yajñaḥ] 'the sacrifice authorises men.' With @[vi] it is Atm. when used intransitively, @[chātrāḥ vikurvate] 'pupils study,' @[svarān vikurute bhāvakaḥ] 'the musician varies the tones;' but @[cittaṃ vikaroti kāmaḥ] 'Love affects the mind,' @[vicakruḥ anyasya] Bh. VIII. 21. & with @[upa] in the sense of 'helping or doing good to' is used in both the Padas; @[na hi pradīpo parasparasya upakaroti] (So Cr. Us.) 'two strong lights do not indeed help (i.e. serve to intensify) each other;' @[sā copakurute yayā pareṣām] 'that is wealth by means of which one obliges another' (Kir. VII. 28.).

The causal of @[kṛ] is Atm. when @[vi] is prefixed to it; @[padaṃ vikārayate] 'mispronounces the accent on the syllable.'

@[kṝ]—'to scatter' with @[apa] is Atm. in the sense of 'turning up or scratching with joy,' or turning up with the intention of making an abode or for maintenance (by quadrupeds or birds);' in this sense @[śam] is prefixed to @[kṝ]; @[apaskirate vṛṣo harṣāt] 'the bull turns up the ground in joy;' similarly @[apaskirate kukkuṭo grāse]; @[bhūmiṃ apaskirate] (digs a hole for lying in) @[vā āśrayārthaṃ] or @[chāyāpaskiraṃāṇaḥ iti] &c. (Up. II. 9).

* @[anupārabhyāṃ kṛñaḥ] | Pāṇ. I. 3. 79.
† @[hiṃsanāvalepanasevanaāhāsikya pratiyatna prakathano payogeṣu] @[caḥ] Pāṇ. I. 3. 32.
‡ @[apaścatuṣpācchakuiṣvālekhane] Pāṇ. VI. 3. 142. @[alekhane iti śabdaḥ syāt | harṣādibhiścaiva alekhane smṛtaḥ] | Sid. Kau.