---
rule: §667
---

The participle of the present Parasmaipada is formed by the addition of the affix @deva[अत्] to that form of a root, primitive or derivative, which it assumes before the third person plural termination of the Present Tense. If the base ends in @deva[अ], the @deva[अ] is dropped; e.g.

@[bhū] (1 cl.)—@[bhav + anti] Pres. 3rd pl. @[bhav + at = bhavat] Pres. P. being.
@[sthā] (1 cl.)—@[tiṣṭha + anti] " @[tiṣṭha + at = tiṣṭhat] " standing.
@[dviṣ] (2 cl.)—@[dviṣ + anti] " @[dviṣ + at = dviṣat] " hating.

similarly from

@[ad] (2 cl.) @[adat] eating. @[rudh] (7 cl.) @[rundhat] preventing.
@[i] (2 cl.) @[yat] going. @[kṛ] (8 cl.) @[kurvat] doing.
@[yaj] (1 cl.) @[yajat] sacrificing. @[tan] (8 cl.) @[tanvat] stretching, &c.
@[dīv] (4 cl.) @[dīvyat] playing. @[krī] (9 cl.) @[krīṇat] buying.
@[ṣu] (5 cl.) @[sunvat] extracting. @[muṣ] (9 cl.) @[muṣṇat] stealing, &c.
@[tud] (6 cl.) @[tudat] giving pain. @[cur] (10 cl.) @[corayat] stealing.
@[bodhay] cau. of @[budh], @[bodhayat] causing to know. ‖ @[jubodhiṣ] desid. of @[budh], @[jubodhiṣat] desiring to know.
@[dits] desid. of @[dā], @[ditsat] desiring to give.
@[cekṛṣ] freq. of @[kṛṣ], @[cekṛṣat] throwing again and again,
&c. &c. &c. &c. &c.

(a) The term. @deva[अत्] is optionally changed to @deva[वत्] when added to the root @[vid]; @[vidat] or @[vidvat] 'knowing.'

(b) The affix @deva[अत्] when added to @[dviṣ] and @[ṣu] 'to extract Soma juice in a sacrifice' has the sense of an agent; as @[dviṣat] m. 'an enemy,' @[yajñe somaṃ sunvantaḥ] 'they are the extractors of Soma juice in a sacrifice.'

H. S. G. 27

(c) When affixed to @[arh] it has the sense of 'fitness, respect'; @[arhat] 'one deserving respect, respectable.'

(d) @[i] 2 P. and @[dhṛ] can take the affix @deva[अत्] when the idea of difficulty is not present, @[adhīyat] 'studying without experiencing any difficulty;' @[dhārayat] 'holding or bearing with ease;' but @[kaṣṭam adhīte], @[kaṣṭaṃ dhārayati].