---
rule: §772
---

The gerund in @[am] of roots having the sense of @[han] 'to strike,' &c., are used with words denoting the instrument when the object of the gerund and of the principal verb is the same; @[daṇḍopāghātaṃ gāḥ kālayati] i.e. @[daṇḍenopaghātaṃ] 'he collects together cows beating (them) with a stick;' @[cābukopāghātam]; but @[daṇḍena goṃ prahatyā gāḥ kālayati].

(a) The gerunds of @[pīḍ], @[rudh] &c., @[kṛ], with @[upa], are used with nouns having the sense of the Loc. or the Inst.; @[pādopīḍaṃ hate] i.e. @[pādābhyāṃ upapīḍam]; @[vrajoparodhaṃ gāḥ sthāpayati] i.e. @[vrajena] / @[vraje uparodhaṃ vā]; @[pāṇyupakṛte dhānāḥ sandahati] i.e. @[pāṇau upakṛte] @[pāṇinopakṛtaṃ vā] | Sid. Kau.

(b) Similarly @[keśākṛṣṭaṃ yudhyante] i.e. @[keśeṣu ākṛṣṭam]; @[nakhābhinnaṃ] i.e. @[nakhena ābhinnam]; @[aṅgulyabhyāsaṃ khaṇḍikāṃ gṛhṇāti] i.e. @[aṅgulyā abhyāsaṃ yā khaṇḍikā] |

(c) Nouns having the sense of the Ablative and the Accusative are used with the gerund of a root when haste or hurry is intended; @[śayyotthāyaṃ dhāvati] 'runs having quickly got up from the bed;' @[dhanuścchidaṃ yudhyante]; @[sragvihāyam], &c.

- @[adhikaraṇe bandhaḥ] | @[saṃkhyāyām] Pāṇ. III. 4. 41. 42. † @[ca jīvanapparuṣayoḥ naśivahoyoḥ] | Pāṇ. III. 4. 43.
- @[ūrdhvaṃ hutyupūryoḥ] | Pāṇ. III. 4. 44. †† @[upamānānni karmaṇi ca] | Pāṇ. III. 4. 45.
- @[hiṃsārthānāṃ ca samānakarmaṇāṃ] | @[saptamyāṃ copapīḍarudhakarṣaḥ] | @[samāsāntaḥ kṛñaḥ ca] | @[apādāne parītyājayoḥ] | @[dvitīyāyāṃ ca] | Pāṇ. III. 4. 48-53.

H. S. G. 29.