---
rule: §780
---

As already remarked (See § 54) there are three numbers in Sanskrit: a singular number, denoting a single individual, a dual number denoting two, and a plural number denoting more than two. Besides these general senses—

*As the great bulk of Sanskrit literature is thrown in the form of verse, the laws of Syntax will be found not to be always observed by the poets. In ordinary prose writings the usual order of words in a sentence is, first the subject with its adjuncts, then the object with its adjuncts, then the adverbs and other indeclinables (extensions of the predicate) and lastly the predicate. The chief characteristics of Sanskrit style are in the words of Prof. Max Müller, 'the predominance of coordination, the use of the Locative Absolute, a fondness for compounds and indeclinable participles supplying the place of subordinate clauses, the frequent employment of the Past Participle instead of the finite verb, a predilection for passive forms, and the absence of the indirect construction and of the subjunctive mood. For the latter reason the use of the tenses and moods is comparatively simple; on the other hand, the use of the cases, being much less definite than in Latin and Greek presents some difficulties.'*

—M. Williams' Grammar for Beginners.

(a) The singular may be used to denote a class; @[siṃhaḥ mṛgādhipaḥ] the lion is the king of beasts, @[brāhmaṇaḥ pūjyaḥ] &c.

(b) The dual sometimes denotes a male and a female of the same class; @[pitarau] parents; @[caṭakau] a male and a female of sparrow.

(1) Note:—Words like @[yugma], @[mithuna], @[yuga], @[yuñja], &c. meaning 'a pair,' &c. which are dual in sense but singular in form ought to be always used in the singular, except when several pairs are meant.

(2) Note:—Words like @[hastau], @[netrau], @[pādau], &c. should always be used in the dual in Sanskrit.

(c) The plural, like the singular, may represent a class, @[brāhmaṇāḥ pūjyāḥ] (or @[brāhmaṇaḥ pūjyaḥ]) Brahmanas (i. e. the brāhmaṇa class) are adorable.

(1) The plural is not unfrequently used as a mark of respect or reverence. @[iti śrīśaṅkarācāryāḥ]; so (says) the venerable Shankaracharya; @[ity ācāryadarśanam] this is the opinion of the revered preceptor, &c.

(2) In the first person, great personages and writers sometimes use the plural instead of the singular, @[vayam api bhavantyaḥ kim api pṛcchāmaḥ] we (i. e. I,) too ask you something; @[iti vayam] but we (i. e. I, the writer) hold this opinion; @[vayam api ca nirūpayiṣyāmahe] we rule over speech (i. e. language).

(3) Words like @[dārāḥ], @[gṛhāḥ], @[akṣatāḥ], @[śilāḥ], @[āpaḥ], @[prāṇāḥ], @[astrāḥ], &c. are always used in the plural, though some of them are singular in sense.

(4) Names of countries which are really the names of the people inhabiting them, must be used in the plural; @[saḥ videhān upāyayau] he went to Videha, &c.

But in the case of compounds ending in words denoting a country, such as @[deśa], @[viṣaya], &c. the sing. must be used; @[asti magadha-deśe pāṭaliputraṃ nāma nagaram] there is a town called Pataliputra in the country of Magadha.

(5) The plural of proper nouns denotes a family or race as in English; @[janakānāṃ raghuṇāṃ ca yat sat sattvaṃ bhavet tathā] Utta.