---
rule: §812
---

The Instrumental case primarily expresses either the agent (when the construction is passive) or the instrument or means by which an action is done. @[aho mahimānaṃ ajānatā mayā tvam asi avajñāsīḥ] thou wast disrespected by me, not knowing thy greatness;

- @[buddhikhādarthayoḥ śābdakarmāṇāṃ ca nijicchayā] | @[bhāvyajyakarmaṇy anyeṣāṃ prathamaṃ 'nyatamaḥ mataḥ] || Sid. Kau. on Pāṇ. VII. 1. 69.

† @[kartākaraṇayos tṛtīyā] | Pāṇ. II. 3. 18.

@[rāmeṇa bāṇena hato vālī] Vali was killed by Rāma with an arrow (here @[rāmeṇa] is the agent; @[bāṇena] the instrument)

(a) The Instrumental is also used in the following senses: @[prakṛtyā sundaraḥ] lovely by nature, @[prāyeṇa kriyāvān] he is almost a ritualist, @[ākhyayā gārgyaḥ] Gargya by family name; @[sukhena yāti gacchet] with ease; so @[samena eti, viṣamena eti], &c. @[dvi droṇena dhānyaṃ krīṇāti] he buys two dronas of corn at a time; @[ekaśatena paśūn krīṇāti] he buys one thousand beasts at a time, &c.

(b) In the case of numerals and words expressive of measure the Acc. may also be used; @[dvi droṇaṃ krīṇāti dhānyam], @[ekaśatena śatena śataṃ śataṃ vatsān pāyayati payaḥ]; &c.

(c) Obs.—† The root @[div] 'to play,' however, governs the Accusative or the Instrumental of the instrument used; @[akṣaiḥ akṣān vā dīvyati] he plays at dice.

(d) The root @[jñā] with @[sam] also governs the Accusative or the Instrumental, @[pitrā pitaraṃ vā saṃjānīte] he recognises or lives in peace with his father, but @[viṣṇuṃ saṃjānīte] remember Viṣṇu.