---
rule: §817
---

The Instrumental is used with words expressing the idea of—

(a) excelling; @[pūrvāṃś ca mahābhāga tvayātiśeṣe]@ Oh fortunate one, you excel your ancestors in that (devotion); @[atitapyatāpasa tāmra dhāmaḥ sahasradhā gucchaḥ]@ (Mb. 3.17.) he surpasses, by his lustre, the lustre of the sun, @[kirīṭena khalu vanamālākalpitaṃ vanatatābhiḥ]@ | Sak. I.

(b) resemblance, likeness, equality; @[svareṇa pitaram anukarati]@ resembles his father in voice; @[dehabandhanena svareṇa ca rāmam evānukaroti]@ (Utt. 4.); @[asya mukhaṃ mātuḥ mukhena saṃvadati]@ his face resembles that of his mother; @[vīryeṇa sa hi viṣṇutulyaḥ]@ equal to Viṣṇu in valour.

(c) swearing, @[bharatenātmanā cāhaṃ śape]@ I swear by Bharata and myself, @[śāpitāsi mama priyeṇa]@ I conjure thee by my life.

(d) rejoicing, being pleased, @[bhaktyā gurvanukulampayā ca prītāsmi]@ I am pleased with thee by thy devotion to your preceptor and compassion upon me; @[kāpuruṣaḥ svalpakenāpi tuṣyati]@ a low person is satisfied with little.

(e) motion (the conveyance or the part of the body on which a thing is carried being put in the Instrumental case): @[rathena gacchati]@ 'he moves about in a chariot.'

(f) price (real or metaphorical) at which a thing is bought; @[śatena krītaḥ]@ 'bought for a hundred (rupees, etc.)'; @[svaprāṇavyayenāpi rakṣaṇīyāḥ suhṛdaḥ]@ 'the life of a friend ought to be saved even at the cost of one's life.'

---

@[liṅgahetuliṅge]@ | Pāṇ. II. 3. 21. | † @[hetoḥ]@ | Pāṇ. II. 3. 23. @[phalam api iha hetuḥ]@ | @[dravyādiṣv asādhāraṇaṃ nirvyāpārasādhāraṇaṃ ca hetutvam]@ | @[karaṇatvaṃ tu kriyāmātrasādhāraṇam vyāpārāniyataṃ ca]@ | Sid. Kau.