---
rule: §829
---

The particles @[namaḥ], @[svasti], @[svāhā] and @[svadhā] (exclamations used in offering oblations to gods and manes respectively), @[alam] meaning 'equal to, a match for' and @[vaṣaṭ] (an exclamation accompanying an oblation to a deity) govern the Dative case, @[tasmai namaḥ śambhave] 'I bow to that Śambhu;' @[prajābhyaḥ svasti] 'may it be well with the subjects;' @[svasti'stu te] (Rag. V. 17.) 'Farewell to thee;' @[agnaye svāhā] 'this offering to Agni;' similarly @[pitṛbhyaḥ svadhā]; @[daityebhyo hariḥ alam] 'Hari is a match for the demons;' so @[alaṃ mallaḥ mallāya] (Mah. Bhaṣ.) 'one wrestler is a match for another;' (see Rag. II. 39. Bhaṭṭi. XIV. 98.); @[vaṣaṭ indrāya] 'this oblation to Indra.'

(a) But when @[kṛ] is used with @[namaḥ], it becomes the principal verb; and therefore governs the Accusative case; @[namaskaroti devān] 'bows down to gods' (when the sense of an infinitive is suppressed, of course the Dative will be used, see § 828).

(b) Words having the sense of @[alam], such as @[prabhuḥ], @[samarthaḥ], @[śaktaḥ], &c. and also the verb @[bhū], are used with the Dative (Sid. Kau.) @[daityebhyo hariḥ prabhuḥ samarthaḥ śakto vā]; @[prabhuḥ-samarthaḥ-śaktaḥ bhavati tasmai]; @[bhavati naṣṭo janāya]; @[vidhirapi na yebhyaḥ prabhavati] (Bhar. II. 94.); @[prabhu] and the other words may also be used with the Genitive (Sid. Kau.)

- @[kriyārthoppadasya ca karmaṇi śāsaninaḥ]. @[tumarthācca bhāvavacanāt]. P. II. 3. 13.

† @[namaḥ svastisvāhāsvadhālamvaṣaḍyogācca]. P. II. 3. 16.

‡ @[upapada parimukhyateḥ kārakatvavibhaktiravīśīyasī]. P. II. 3. 65.

@[prabhavati nijasya kanyakājanaaya mahārājaḥ] (Abhi. Mad. IV.) the great king has power over his daughter.

(c) Verbs meaning 'to salute' such as @[praṇam], @[praṇipat], &c. may govern the Dative or the Accusative, @[na praṇamanti devatābhyaḥ] (S.) they do not bow down to deities; @[tāṃ bhaktipraṇatenaiva cetasā praṇanāma] saluted her with a mind bowed down with devotion; @[praṇipatya kharāṃstasmai śamayitre amarerdviṣām] (Rag. 2. 15.) the gods bowed respectfully to him, the annihilator of the enemies of the immortals; @[vāgiśe] (@[vāgādhipatyābhiḥ]) @[praṇipatya] (Kum. II. 3.) having bowed to the lord of speech &c.