---
rule: §840
---

The words @[anya], @[itara] and others having a similar sense, the particles @[ārāt] 'near or distant,' @[ṛte] 'without,' words expressive of direction used with reference to time or space (except when they refer to the limbs of the body) and those derived from the root @[añc] at the end of compounds, and indeclinables ending in @[tas] and @[āhi] are constructed with the Ablative; @[anyo 'sya itaro vā kṛṣṇāt] different from Kṛṣṇa; @[itaro rāvaṇād eṣa rāghavānucaro yadi] Bhaṭṭi. VII. 106. If he be one other than Rāvaṇa and a follower of Rāma; @[ārād vanāt] near or away from the forest, @[ṛte krauryāt samāyātaḥ] (Bhaṭṭi. VII. 105) come without (setting aside) his cruelty; @[prāg grāmāt uttaro vā] to the east or the north of the village; @[phālgunāt prācyaḥ caitraḥ] the month of Phālguna is prior to that of Caitra; but @[prāk kāyasya] the (forepart) of the body; @[prācyatas paścāc ca grāmāt] to the east or to the west of the village; @[prāg ahna uttarāt] (Bhaṭṭi. VII. 106) before the day dawned, @[dakṣiṇā dakṣiṇāhi vā grāmāt] to the south or in the southern direction of the village; @[uttarā sāgarāt] (Bhaṭṭi.) in the north of the sea.

Obs.— @[ṛte] is sometimes used with the Accusative, @[ṛte 'pi tvāṃ na bhaviṣyanti sarve] (Bhag. XI. 32) even without thee all will die.

(c) Words like @[ataḥ], @[ārabhya], @[bahiḥ], @[anantaram], @[ūrdhvam], @[param] &c. are used with the Ablative; the first word may also be used with adverbs of time; @[tasmād dinād ataḥ prabhṛti] from that day; @[tataḥ-tadā-prabhṛti] since then; @[adyaprabhṛty anantāṅgasya tavāsmi dāsaḥ] (Kum. V. 86); @[tataḥ], @[tasmāt dinād ārabhya], @[mālasthāḥ prathamāvalokadivāsād ārabhya]; @[bahir grāmāt] outside the village; @[puraṃ nirūpya marakatadvārād bahiḥ] (Raghu) went out of the emerald gate of the town; @[ūrdhvaṃ saṃvatsarāt] (M.S. IX. 77) after a year— @[ata ūrdhvam] henceforward; @[adhvanaḥ param] (Ragh. I. 17) beyond the path; @[āgrahayanāt param]; @[kiraṇopajarāśamatād anantaram] (Ragh. III. 70.) after the dropping of old leaves; see Bhag. XII. 12.