---
rule: §864
---

The place where an action takes place with reference to the subject or object is called Adhikaraṇa (@[ādhikaraṇam]) and is put in the Locative case; @[śete girigarbhe] (Bham. I. 50); @[haṃso nandane kānane] (Ibid 64); @[sthālyāṃ odanaṃ pacati] cooks food in a cooking utensil; @[karṇe kathayati] tells (something) into the ear; @[bale te śaktir asti], &c. The Locative also denotes the time when an action takes place; @[teṣu vidrāviteṣu tadā diśākuśaḥ] (Kum. I. 1.) the gods being harassed at that time; @[dinante tamasaḥ pāre] (Ragh. II. 15.)

(a) Verbal derivatives in @[in] and having the sense of the p. p. participle govern the Locative of their object; @[adhītī vyākaraṇe] one by whom grammar is studied; @[grahītī ṣaḍveduḥ] by whom the six Aṅgas were mastered, &c.

The words @[sādhu] and @[asādhu] govern the Locative of that with reference to which they are used; @[sādhuḥ pitari mātari] well behaved towards his mother; @[asādhur mātule] ill-behaved towards his maternal uncle.

(b) The object or purpose for which any thing is done is put in the Locative case when the thing desired is intimately connected with that on which the action takes place; @[ajinārthi hanti vyāghraṃ dantārthi hanti kuñjaram | romārthī camarīṃ hanti kastyā kasturikā hataḥ ||] (Mb.). (Man) kills the tiger for his skin, the elephant for his tusks, the Chamary deer for her hair and the musk-deer for his musk. If there is no intimate union the Dative is used.

Obs.—Sometimes the Instrumental is used to denote the object for which any thing is done; @[vetanena] (for wages) @[anyān bhṛṅkte]. Sometimes the Loc. is used to denote the object in general; @[yathā vartase dhātrā karmasu niyuktaḥ] since you are created by the creator to do duty, fulfil it.

* @[ādhāro'dhikaraṇam] | @[ādhārasya apratītiḥ ca] Pāṇ. I. 4. 45, II. 3. 36.

‡ @[ṣaṣṭhyāṃ viṣayasya karmaṇi upasaṃkhyānam] | @[khalu asādhuprayoge ca] | Vārttikas.