---
rule: §911
---

The infinitive in Sanskrit generally expresses the purpose or that for which an action is done and thus corresponds to the infinitive of purpose or gerund in English. The infinitive in Sanskrit thus involves the sense of the Dative and may, if desired, be replaced by the Dative of the verbal noun derived from the root; @[pānīyaṃ pātuṃ yamunātaṭam avatatāra] descended to the bank of the Yamunā to drink water; here @[pātum] may be replaced by @[pānāya] (@[pānīyasya pānāya]); @[śabdādīn viṣayān bhoktum] (Reg. ii, 25.) where @[bhoktum] = @[bhogāya].

"The infinitive (formed with @[tum] tum) in Sanskrit," remarks Prof. Monier Williams, "cannot be employed with the same latitude as in other languages. Its use is very limited corresponding to that of the Latin supines, as its termination tum indicates."

(a) "Let the student, therefore, distinguish between the infinitive of Sanskrit and that of Latin and Greek. In these latter languages we have the infinitive made the subject of a proposition; or, in other words, standing in the place of a Nominative with an Accusative case often admissible before it. We have it also assuming different forms, to express present, past, or future time, and completeness or incompleteness in the progress of the action. The Sanskrit infinitive, on the other hand, can never be made the subject of a verb, admits of no Accusative before it, and can only express indeterminate time and incomplete action. Wherever it occurs, it must be considered as the object, and never the subject of some verb expressed or understood. As the object of the verb, it may be regarded as equivalent to a verbal substantive, in which the force of two cases, an Accusative and Dative, is inherent and which differs from other substantives in its power of governing a case. Its use as a substantive, with the force of the Accusative case, corresponds to our use of the Latin infinitive; thus @[tat sarvaṃ śrotum icchāmi] 'I desire to hear all that,' 'id audire cupio,' where @[śrotum] and audire are both equivalent to Accusative. Similarly, @[sā bhāṣṭum ārebhe], 'she began to weep,' and @[mahīṃ jetum ārebhe], he began to conquer the earth, where @[mahījayam ārebhe], he began the conquest of the earth, would be equally correct."

(b) "Bopp considers the termination of the infinitive to be the Accusative of the suffix tu (§ 458. Obs.), and it is certain that in the Veda other cases of nouns formed with this suffix in the sense of infinitives occur; e.g. a Dative in @[tave] or @[tavai], as from @[han] comes @[hantave] 'to kill;' fr. @[anu-i], @[anvetave], 'to follow;' fr. @[man], @[mantavai], 'to think,' there is also a form in @[tos] generally in the sense of an Ablative; e.g. fr. @[i] comes @[etos] 'from going;' fr. @[han], @[hantos], as in @[purā hantos], 'before killing;' and a form in @[tvi] corresponding to the indeclinable participle in @[tvā] of the classical language; e.g. fr. @[han], @[hatvi] 'killing,' fr. @[bhū], @[bhūtvi] 'being,' &c. &c."—Sanskrit Grammar.