---
rule: §961
---

The conditional is used in those conditional sentences in which the Potential may be used when the nonperformance of the action is implied or in which the falsity of the antecedent is involved as a matter of fact. It expresses both future and past time. It must be used in both the antecedent and the consequent clauses; @[yadi varṣed abhaviṣyat tadā śasyam abhaviṣyat] if there would be plentiful rain there would be an abundance of corn; @[yadi viramāpsyas tan mukhasya āmandam tatra ratir abhaviṣyad ambuje kim asmin] hadst thou obtained (which thou hast not) the sweet fragrance of her breath, wouldst thou have had any liking for this lotus?

- @deva[लिङ्निमित्ते लृङ् क्रियातिपत्तौ] । Pāṇ. III. 3. 139. @deva[हेतुहेतुमद्भावादिलिङ्निमित्तं तल्लृङ् भविष्यत्यर्थे किं तु स्यात् क्रियायाः अनिष्पत्तौ गम्यमानायाम्] । Sid. Kau.

**Obs.**—When a past action is to be indicated the conditional may be optionally used in the sense of the Potential; @[kathaṃ dharmam mahāpoḍhum avardhiṣyas tat sevayā? tyajeḥ] how could you give up your religion?

(a) Also where the Potential is used in conjunction with the particles @[yathā], @[api], @[jātu] &c.; @[api nāma puruṣaḥ sītāṃ nārthayiṣyata rāghavaḥ । nahi prārthayate jātv astrailokyaṃ yaḥ kulastriyam] ॥ @[saṅkalpaṃ pālayiṣyas tvām iyaṃ śuddhamānasā । kṣamā satyavatīr abhāpsyas tvaṃ rāma sītānibandhanaṃ] ॥ (Bhaṭṭi. XXI. 3. 4.)

(b) When wonder is to be expressed the Conditional is optionally used where the Potential is used in combination with the particles @[yatra], @[yatra vā] or @[atra] when the action does not take place; @[āścaryaṃ yatra yatra vā raghuśreṣṭho 'bhaviṣyan bhavet tava । tasyām asyāṃ vinaṣṭāyāṃ tatra kim abhaviṣyathāḥ kulam] ॥ (Bhaṭṭi. XXI. 8).